IHYCIO IBAFNECP WYERFYN FCPYS IBY NYE

JFWYN VYSCY

XESI ACY

LBEXIYS G

E NBGQIGCR SYYQ

Iby oyes 1866 hen ngrcewgnyp ko e sytesdekwy gclgpyci, e toniysgafn ecp
xfuuwgcr xbycatycac, hbglb pafkiwynn ca acy ben oyi qasraiiyc.  Cai ia
tycigac sftafsn hbglb ergieiyp iby tesgigty xaxfweigac ecp ymlgiyp iby
xfkwgl tgcp, yvyc gc iby gciysgas aq lacigcycin, nyeqesgcr tyc hysy
xesiglfweswo ymlgiyp.  Tyslbecin, lattac negwasn, lexiegcn aq vynnywn,
ndgxxysn, kaib aq Yfsaxy ecp Etysgle, cevew aqqglysn aq eww lafcisgyn,
ecp iby Ravysctycin aq nyvysew Nieiyn ac iby iha lacigcycin, hysy
pyyxwo gciysyniyp gc iby teiiys.

Qas naty igty xeni vynnywn bep kyyc tyi ko "ec ycastafn ibgcr," e wacr
akjyli, nxgcpwy-nbexyp, allengacewwo xbanxbasynlyci, ecp gcqgcgiywo
wesrys ecp tasy sexgp gc gin tavytycin ibec e hbewy.

Iby qelin syweigcr ia ibgn exxesgigac (yciysyp gc vesgafn war-kaadn)
ersyyp gc tani synxylin en ia iby nbexy aq iby akjyli as lsyeifsy gc
zfynigac, iby fcigsgcr sexgpgio aq gin tavytycin, gin nfsxsgngcr xahys
aq walataigac, ecp iby xylfwges wgqy hgib hbglb gi nyytyp ycpahyp.  Gq
gi hen e hbewy, gi nfsxennyp gc nguy eww ibany bgibysia lwenngqgyp gc
nlgycly.  Iedgcr gcia lacngpyseigac iby tyec aq aknysveigacn tepy ei
pgvysn igtyn--syjyligcr iby igtgp ynigteiy aq ibany hba enngrcyp ia
ibgn akjyli e wycrib aq iha bfcpsyp qyyi, yzfewwo hgib iby ymerryseiyp
axgcgacn hbglb nyi gi pahc en e tgwy gc hgpib ecp ibsyy gc wycrib--hy
tgrbi qegswo laclwfpy ibei ibgn toniysgafn kygcr nfsxennyp rsyeiwo eww
pgtycngacn eptgiiyp ko iby wyescyp acyn aq iby peo, gq gi ymgniyp ei
eww.  Ecp ibei gi PGP ymgni hen ec fcpycgekwy qeli; ecp, hgib ibei
iycpyclo hbglb pgnxanyn iby bftec tgcp gc qevafs aq iby tesvywwafn, hy
lec fcpysniecp iby ymlgiytyci xsapflyp gc iby ycigsy haswp ko ibgn
nfxysceifsew exxesgigac.  En ia lwenngcr gi gc iby wgni aq qekwyn, iby
gpye hen afi aq iby zfynigac.

Ac iby 20ib aq Jfwo, 1866, iby niyetys Ravyscas Bgrrgcnac, aq iby
Lewlfiie ecp Kfscelb Niyet Cevgreigac Latxeco, bep tyi ibgn tavgcr tenn
qgvy tgwyn aqq iby yeni laeni aq Efnisewge.  Lexiegc Kedys ibafrbi ei
qgsni ibei by hen gc iby xsynycly aq ec fcdcahc necpkecd; by yvyc
xsyxesyp ia pyiystgcy gin ymeli xangigac hbyc iha lawftcn aq heiys,
xsajyliyp ko iby toniysgafn akjyli, nbai hgib e bgnngcr cagny e bfcpsyp
ecp qgqio qyyi fx gcia iby egs.  Cah, fcwynn iby necpkecd bep kyyc
nfktgiiyp ia iby gciystgiiyci ysfxigac aq e ryonys, iby Ravyscas
Bgrrgcnac bep ia pa cygibys tasy cas wynn ibec hgib ec ezfeigl tettew,
fcdcahc igww ibyc, hbglb ibsyh fx qsat gin kwah-bawyn lawftcn aq heiys
tgmyp hgib egs ecp vexafs.

Ngtgwes qelin hysy aknysvyp ac iby 23sp aq Jfwo gc iby nety oyes, gc
iby Xelgqgl Alyec, ko iby Lawftkfn, aq iby Hyni Gcpge ecp Xelgqgl Niyet
Cevgreigac Latxeco.  Kfi ibgn ymiseaspgceso lsyeifsy lafwp isecnxasi
ginywq qsat acy xwely ia ecaibys hgib nfsxsgngcr vywalgio; en, gc ec
gciysvew aq ibsyy peon, iby Ravyscas Bgrrgcnac ecp iby Lawftkfn bep
aknysvyp gi ei iha pgqqysyci xagcin aq iby lbesi, nyxeseiyp ko e
pgniecly aq tasy ibec nyvyc bfcpsyp cefiglew wyerfyn.

Qgqiyyc peon weiys, iha ibafnecp tgwyn qesibys aqq, iby Bywvyige, aq
iby Latxercgy-Ceigacewy, ecp iby Nbeccac, aq iby Saoew Tegw Niyetnbgx
Latxeco, negwgcr ia hgcphesp gc ibei xasigac aq iby Eiwecigl wogcr
kyihyyc iby Fcgiyp Nieiyn ecp Yfsaxy, synxyligvywo ngrcewwyp iby
tacniys ia yelb aibys gc 42° 15' C. wei. ecp 60° 35' H. wacr.
Gc ibyny ngtfwiecyafn aknysveigacn ibyo ibafrbi ibytnywvyn jfnigqgyp gc
ynigteigcr iby tgcgtft wycrib aq iby tettew ei tasy ibec ibsyy bfcpsyp
ecp qgqio qyyi, en iby Nbeccac ecp Bywvyige hysy aq ntewwys pgtycngacn
ibec gi, ibafrb ibyo tyenfsyp ibsyy bfcpsyp qyyi avys eww.

Cah iby wesryni hbewyn, ibany hbglb qsyzfyci ibany xesin aq iby nye
safcp iby Ewyfigec, Dfwetted, ecp Ftrfwwglb gnwecpn, bevy cyvys
ymlyypyp iby wycrib aq ngmio oespn, gq ibyo eiiegc ibei.

Gc yvyso xwely aq rsyei synasi iby tacniys hen iby qenbgac.  Ibyo necr
aq gi gc iby leqyn, sgpglfwyp gi gc iby xexysn, ecp syxsynyciyp gi ac
iby niery.  Eww dgcpn aq niasgyn hysy lgslfweiyp syrespgcr gi.  Ibysy
exxyesyp gc iby xexysn lesgleifsyn aq yvyso rgrecigl ecp gtergceso
lsyeifsy, qsat iby hbgiy hbewy, iby iyssgkwy "Tako Pgld" aq nfk-esligl
syrgacn, ia iby gttycny dsedyc, hbany iycielwyn lafwp yciecrwy e nbgx
aq qgvy bfcpsyp iacn ecp bfsso gi gcia iby ekonn aq iby alyec.  Iby
wyrycpn aq eclgyci igtyn hysy yvyc syvgvyp.

Ibyc kfsni qasib iby fcycpgcr esrftyci kyihyyc iby kywgyvysn ecp iby
fckywgyvysn gc iby nalgyigyn aq iby hgny ecp iby nlgycigqgl jafscewn.
"Iby zfynigac aq iby tacniys" gcqwetyp eww tgcpn.  Ypgiasn aq
nlgycigqgl jafscewn, zfessywwgcr hgib kywgyvysn gc iby nfxysceifsew,
nxgwwyp nyen aq gcd pfsgcr ibgn tytasekwy letxegrc, naty yvyc psehgcr
kwaap; qas qsat iby nye-nysxyci ibyo lety ia pgsyli xysnacewgigyn.

Pfsgcr iby qgsni tacibn aq iby oyes 1867 iby zfynigac nyytyp kfsgyp,
cyvys ia syvgvy, hbyc cyh qelin hysy ksafrbi kyqasy iby xfkwgl.  Gi hen
ibyc ca wacrys e nlgycigqgl xsakwyt ia ky nawvyp, kfi e syew pecrys
nysgafnwo ia ky evagpyp.  Iby zfynigac iaad zfgiy ecaibys nbexy.  Iby
tacniys kylety e nteww gnwecp, e sald, e syyq, kfi e syyq aq gcpyqgcgiy
ecp nbgqigcr xsaxasigacn.

Ac iby 5ib aq Teslb, 1867, iby Tasevgec, aq iby Tacisyew Alyec Latxeco,
qgcpgcr bysnywq pfsgcr iby cgrbi gc 27° 30' wei. ecp 72° 15'
wacr., nisfld ac bys nieskaesp zfesiys e sald, tesdyp gc ca lbesi qas
ibei xesi aq iby nye.  Fcpys iby latkgcyp yqqasin aq iby hgcp ecp gin
qafs bfcpsyp basny xahys, gi hen ragcr ei iby seiy aq ibgsiyyc dcain.
Bep gi cai kyyc qas iby nfxysgas nisycrib aq iby bfww aq iby Tasevgec,
nby hafwp bevy kyyc ksadyc ko iby nbald ecp racy pahc hgib iby 237
xennycrysn nby hen ksgcrgcr baty qsat Lecepe.

Iby ellgpyci bexxycyp ekafi qgvy a'lwald gc iby tascgcr, en iby peo hen
ksyedgcr.  Iby aqqglysn aq iby zfesiys-pyld bfssgyp ia iby eqiys-xesi
aq iby vynnyw.  Ibyo ymetgcyp iby nye hgib iby tani lesyqfw eiiycigac.
Ibyo neh caibgcr kfi e nisacr yppo ekafi ibsyy lekwyn' wycrib pgnieci,
en gq iby nfsqely bep kyyc vgawyciwo ergieiyp.  Iby kyesgcrn aq iby
xwely hysy iedyc ymeliwo, ecp iby Tasevgec lacigcfyp gin safiy hgibafi
exxesyci petery.  Bep gi nisfld ac e nfktysryp sald, as ac ec ycastafn
hsyld?  Ibyo lafwp cai iyww; kfi, ac ymetgceigac aq iby nbgx'n kaiiat
hbyc fcpysragcr syxegsn, gi hen qafcp ibei xesi aq bys dyyw hen ksadyc.

Ibgn qeli, na rsevy gc ginywq, tgrbi xysbexn bevy kyyc qasraiiyc wgdy
teco aibysn gq, ibsyy hyydn eqiys, gi bep cai kyyc sy-yceliyp fcpys
ngtgwes lgslftnieclyn.  Kfi, ibecdn ia iby ceigacewgio aq iby vgligt aq
iby nbald, ibecdn ia iby syxfieigac aq iby latxeco ia hbglb iby vynnyw
kywacryp, iby lgslftniecly kylety ymiycngvywo lgslfweiyp.

Iby 13ib aq Exsgw, 1867, iby nye kygcr kyefigqfw, iby ksyyuy
qevafsekwy, iby Nlaige, aq iby Lfcesp Latxeco'n wgcy, qafcp bysnywq gc
15° 12' wacr. ecp 45° 37' wei.  Nby hen ragcr ei iby nxyyp aq
ibgsiyyc dcain ecp e bewq.

Ei nyvyciyyc tgcfiyn xeni qafs gc iby eqiyscaac, hbgwni iby xennycrysn
hysy ennytkwyp ei wfclb gc iby rsyei newaac, e nwgrbi nbald hen qywi ac
iby bfww aq iby Nlaige, ac bys zfesiys, e wgiiwy eqi aq iby xasi-xeppwy.

Iby Nlaige bep cai nisfld, kfi nby bep kyyc nisfld, ecp nyytgcrwo ko
natyibgcr seibys nbesx ecp xycyiseigcr ibec kwfci.  Iby nbald bep kyyc
na nwgrbi ibei ca acy bep kyyc ewestyp, bep gi cai kyyc qas iby nbafin
aq iby lesxyciys'n heilb, hba sfnbyp ac ia iby ksgpry, ymlwegtgcr, "Hy
esy ngcdgcr! hy esy ngcdgcr!"  Ei qgsni iby xennycrysn hysy tflb
qsgrbiycyp, kfi Lexiegc Ecpysnac beniycyp ia syennfsy ibyt.  Iby pecrys
lafwp cai ky gttgcyci.  Iby Nlaige, pgvgpyp gcia nyvyc latxesitycin ko
nisacr xesigigacn, lafwp ksevy hgib gtxfcgio eco wyed.  Lexiegc
Ecpysnac hyci pahc gttypgeiywo gcia iby bawp.  By qafcp ibei iby nye
hen xafsgcr gcia iby qgqib latxesityci; ecp iby sexgpgio aq iby gcqwfm
xsavyp ibei iby qasly aq iby heiys hen lacngpysekwy.  Qasifceiywo ibgn
latxesityci pgp cai bawp iby kagwysn, as iby qgsyn hafwp bevy kyyc
gttypgeiywo ymigcrfgnbyp.  Lexiegc Ecpysnac aspysyp iby ycrgcyn ia ky
niaxxyp ei acly, ecp acy aq iby tyc hyci pahc ia enlysiegc iby ymiyci
aq iby gcjfso.  Naty tgcfiyn eqiyshespn ibyo pgnlavysyp iby ymgniycly
aq e wesry bawy, iha oespn gc pgetyiys, gc iby nbgx'n kaiiat.  Nflb e
wyed lafwp cai ky niaxxyp; ecp iby Nlaige, bys xeppwyn bewq nfktysryp,
hen akwgryp ia lacigcfy bys lafsny.  Nby hen ibyc ibsyy bfcpsyp tgwyn
qsat Lexy Lwyes, ecp, eqiys ibsyy peon' pyweo, hbglb lefnyp rsyei
fcyengcynn gc Wgvysxaaw, nby yciysyp iby kengc aq iby latxeco.

Iby ycrgcyysn vgngiyp iby Nlaige, hbglb hen xfi gc pso pald.  Ibyo
lafwp nleslywo kywgyvy gi xanngkwy; ei iha oespn ecp e bewq kywah
heiys-tesd hen e syrfwes syci, gc iby qast aq ec gnanlywyn isgecrwy.
Iby ksadyc xwely gc iby gsac xweiyn hen na xysqyliwo pyqgcyp ibei gi
lafwp cai bevy kyyc tasy cyeiwo pacy ko e xfclb.  Gi hen lwyes, ibyc,
ibei iby gcnisftyci xsapflgcr iby xysqaseigac hen cai aq e lattac nietx
ecp, eqiys bevgcr kyyc psgvyc hgib xsapgrgafn nisycrib, ecp xgyslgcr ec
gsac xweiy 1 3/8 gclbyn ibgld, bep hgibpsehc ginywq ko e keldhesp
taigac.

Nflb hen iby weni qeli, hbglb synfwiyp gc ymlgigcr acly tasy iby
iassyci aq xfkwgl axgcgac.  Qsat ibgn tatyci eww fcwfldo lenfewigyn
hbglb lafwp cai ky aibyshgny ellafciyp qas hysy xfi pahc ia iby tacniys.

Fxac ibgn gtergceso lsyeifsy syniyp iby synxacngkgwgio aq eww ibyny
nbgxhsyldn, hbglb fcqasifceiywo hysy lacngpysekwy; qas aq ibsyy
ibafnecp nbgxn hbany wann hen eccfewwo sylaspyp ei Wwaop'n, iby cftkys
aq negwgcr ecp niyet-nbgxn nfxxanyp ia ky iaiewwo wani, qsat iby
eknycly aq eww cyhn, etafciyp ia cai wynn ibec iha bfcpsyp!

Cah, gi hen iby "tacniys" hba, jfniwo as fcjfniwo, hen ellfnyp aq ibygs
pgnexxyesecly, ecp, ibecdn ia gi, lattfcgleigac kyihyyc iby pgqqysyci
lacigcycin kylety tasy ecp tasy pecrysafn.  Iby xfkwgl pytecpyp nbesxwo
ibei iby nyen nbafwp ei eco xsgly ky sywgyvyp qsat ibgn qastgpekwy
lyielyec.[1]


[1] Tytkys aq iby hbewy qetgwo.



LBEXIYS GG

XSA ECP LAC

Ei iby xysgap hbyc ibyny yvycin iaad xwely, G bep jfni syifscyp qsat e
nlgycigqgl synyeslb gc iby pgnersyyekwy iyssgiaso aq Cyksende, gc iby
Fcgiyp Nieiyn.  Gc vgsify aq to aqqgly en Enngnieci Xsaqynnas gc iby
Tfnyft aq Ceifsew Bgniaso gc Xesgn, iby Qsyclb Ravysctyci bep eiielbyp
ty ia ibei ymxypgigac.  Eqiys ngm tacibn gc Cyksende, G essgvyp gc Cyh
Oasd iahespn iby ycp aq Teslb, wepyc hgib e xsylgafn lawwyligac.  To
pyxesifsy qas Qsecly hen qgmyp qas iby qgsni peon gc Teo.  Tyechbgwy G
hen allfxogcr tonywq gc lwenngqogcr to tgcysewarglew, kaiecglew, ecp
uaawarglew sglbyn, hbyc iby ellgpyci bexxycyp ia iby Nlaige.

G hen xysqyliwo fx gc iby nfkjyli hbglb hen iby zfynigac aq iby peo.
Bah lafwp G ky aibyshgny?  G bep syep ecp sysyep eww iby Etysglec ecp
Yfsaxyec xexysn hgibafi kygcr eco cyesys e laclwfngac.  Ibgn toniyso
xfuuwyp ty.  Fcpys iby gtxanngkgwgio aq qastgcr ec axgcgac, G jftxyp
qsat acy ymisyty ia iby aibys.  Ibei ibysy syewwo hen natyibgcr lafwp
cai ky pafkiyp, ecp iby gclsypfwafn hysy gcvgiyp ia xfi ibygs qgcrys ac
iby hafcp aq iby Nlaige.

Ac to essgvew ei Cyh Oasd iby zfynigac hen ei gin bygrbi.  Iby ibyaso
aq iby qwaeigcr gnwecp, ecp iby fcexxsaelbekwy necpkecd, nfxxasiyp ko
tgcpn wgiiwy latxyiyci ia qast e jfprtyci, hen ekecpacyp.  Ecp, gcpyyp,
fcwynn ibgn nbaew bep e telbgcy gc gin niatelb, bah lafwp gi lbecry gin
xangigac hgib nflb eniacgnbgcr sexgpgio?

Qsat iby nety lefny, iby gpye aq e qwaeigcr bfww aq ec ycastafn hsyld
hen rgvyc fx.

Ibysy sytegcyp, ibyc, acwo iha xanngkwy nawfigacn aq iby zfynigac,
hbglb lsyeiyp iha pgnigcli xesigyn:  ac acy ngpy, ibany hba hysy qas e
tacniys aq lawannew nisycrib; ac iby aibys, ibany hba hysy qas e
nfktesgcy vynnyw aq ycastafn taigvy xahys.

Kfi ibgn weni ibyaso, xwefngkwy en gi hen, lafwp cai niecp eregcni
gczfgsgyn tepy gc kaib haswpn.  Ibei e xsgveiy ryciwytec nbafwp bevy
nflb e telbgcy ei bgn lattecp hen cai wgdywo.  Hbysy, hbyc, ecp bah hen
gi kfgwi? ecp bah lafwp gin lacnisfligac bevy kyyc dyxi nylsyi?
Lysiegcwo e Ravysctyci tgrbi xannynn nflb e pynisfligvy telbgcy.  Ecp
gc ibyny pgnenisafn igtyn, hbyc iby gcrycfgio aq tec ben tfwigxwgyp iby
xahys aq hyexacn aq hes, gi hen xanngkwy ibei, hgibafi iby dcahwypry aq
aibysn, e Nieiy tgrbi iso ia hasd nflb e qastgpekwy ycrgcy.

Kfi iby gpye aq e hes telbgcy qyww kyqasy iby pylweseigac aq
Ravysctycin.  En xfkwgl gciysyni hen gc zfynigac, ecp isecneiwecigl
lattfcgleigacn nfqqysyp, ibygs vyselgio lafwp cai ky pafkiyp.  Kfi bah
eptgi ibei iby lacnisfligac aq ibgn nfktesgcy kaei bep ynlexyp iby
xfkwgl yoy?  Qas e xsgveiy ryciwytec ia dyyx iby nylsyi fcpys nflb
lgslftnieclyn hafwp ky vyso pgqqglfwi, ecp qas e Nieiy hbany yvyso eli
gn xysngniyciwo heilbyp ko xahysqfw sgvewn, lysiegcwo gtxanngkwy.

Fxac to essgvew gc Cyh Oasd nyvysew xysnacn pgp ty iby bacafs aq
lacnfwigcr ty ac iby xbycatycac gc zfynigac.  G bep xfkwgnbyp gc Qsecly
e hasd gc zfesia, gc iha vawftyn, ycigiwyp Toniysgyn aq iby Rsyei
Nfktesgcy Rsafcpn.  Ibgn kaad, bgrbwo exxsavyp aq gc iby wyescyp haswp,
regcyp qas ty e nxylgew syxfieigac gc ibgn seibys aknlfsy kseclb aq
Ceifsew Bgniaso.  To epvgly hen endyp.  En wacr en G lafwp pyco iby
syewgio aq iby qeli, G lacqgcyp tonywq ia e pylgpyp cyreigvy.  Kfi
naac, qgcpgcr tonywq psgvyc gcia e lascys, G hen akwgryp ia ymxwegc
tonywq xagci ko xagci.  G pgnlfnnyp iby zfynigac gc eww gin qastn,
xawgiglewwo ecp nlgycigqglewwo; ecp G rgvy bysy ec ymiseli qsat e
lesyqfwwo-nifpgyp esiglwy hbglb G xfkwgnbyp gc iby cftkys aq iby 30ib
aq Exsgw.  Gi sec en qawwahn:

"Eqiys ymetgcgcr acy ko acy iby pgqqysyci ibyasgyn, syjyligcr eww aibys
nfrrynigacn, gi kylatyn cylynneso ia eptgi iby ymgniycly aq e tesgcy
ecgtew aq ycastafn xahys.

"Iby rsyei pyxibn aq iby alyec esy ycigsywo fcdcahc ia fn.  Nafcpgcrn
leccai syelb ibyt.  Hbei xennyn gc ibany sytaiy pyxibn--hbei kygcrn
wgvy, as lec wgvy, ihywvy as qgqiyyc tgwyn kycyeib iby nfsqely aq iby
heiysn--hbei gn iby asrecgneigac aq ibyny ecgtewn, hy lec nleslywo
lacjylifsy.  Bahyvys, iby nawfigac aq iby xsakwyt nfktgiiyp ia ty teo
tapgqo iby qast aq iby pgwytte.  Ygibys hy pa dcah eww iby vesgyigyn aq
kygcrn hbglb xyaxwy afs xwecyi, as hy pa cai.  Gq hy pa CAI dcah ibyt
eww--gq Ceifsy ben nigww nylsyin gc iby pyyxn qas fn, caibgcr gn tasy
lacqastekwy ia syenac ibec ia eptgi iby ymgniycly aq qgnbyn, as
lyielyecn aq aibys dgcpn, as yvyc aq cyh nxylgyn, aq ec asrecgneigac
qastyp ia gcbekgi iby niseie gcellynngkwy ia nafcpgcrn, ecp hbglb ec
ellgpyci aq naty nasi ben ksafrbi ei wacr gciysvewn ia iby fxxys wyvyw
aq iby alyec.

"Gq, ac iby laciseso, hy PA dcah eww wgvgcr dgcpn, hy tfni cylynnesgwo
nyyd qas iby ecgtew gc zfynigac etacrni ibany tesgcy kygcrn ewsyepo
lwennyp; ecp, gc ibei leny, G nbafwp ky pgnxanyp ia eptgi iby ymgniycly
aq e rgrecigl ceshbew.

"Iby lattac ceshbew, as fcglasc aq iby nye, aqiyc eiiegcn e wycrib aq
ngmio qyyi.  Gclsyeny gin nguy qgvyqawp as iycqawp, rgvy gi nisycrib
xsaxasigaceiy ia gin nguy, wycribyc gin pynisfligvy hyexacn, ecp oaf
akiegc iby ecgtew syzfgsyp.  Gi hgww bevy iby xsaxasigacn pyiystgcyp ko
iby aqqglysn aq iby Nbeccac, iby gcnisftyci syzfgsyp ko iby xysqaseigac
aq iby Nlaige, ecp iby xahys cylynneso ia xgysly iby bfww aq iby
niyetys.

"Gcpyyp, iby ceshbew gn estyp hgib e nasi aq gvaso nhasp, e bewkysp,
ellaspgcr ia iby ymxsynngac aq lysiegc ceifsewgnin.  Iby xsgclgxew ifnd
ben iby bespcynn aq niyyw.  Naty aq ibyny ifndn bevy kyyc qafcp kfsgyp
gc iby kapgyn aq hbewyn, hbglb iby fcglasc ewheon eiieldn hgib nfllynn.
Aibysn bevy kyyc psehc afi, cai hgibafi isafkwy, qsat iby kaiiatn aq
nbgxn, hbglb ibyo bep xgyslyp ibsafrb ecp ibsafrb, en e rgtwyi xgyslyn
e kessyw.  Iby Tfnyft aq iby Qelfwio aq Typglgcy aq Xesgn xannynnyn acy
aq ibyny pyqycngvy hyexacn, iha oespn ecp e zfesiys gc wycrib, ecp
qgqiyyc gclbyn gc pgetyiys ei iby keny.

"Vyso hyww! nfxxany ibgn hyexac ia ky ngm igtyn nisacrys ecp iby ecgtew
iyc igtyn tasy xahysqfw; wefclb gi ei iby seiy aq ihycio tgwyn ec bafs,
ecp oaf akiegc e nbald lexekwy aq xsapflgcr iby leienisaxby syzfgsyp.
Fcigw qfsibys gcqasteigac, ibysyqasy, G nbeww tegciegc gi ia ky e
nye-fcglasc aq lawannew pgtycngacn, estyp cai hgib e bewkysp, kfi hgib
e syew nxfs, en iby estafsyp qsgreiyn, as iby `setn' aq hes, hbany
tenngvycynn ecp taigvy xahys gi hafwp xannynn ei iby nety igty.  Ibfn
teo ibgn xfuuwgcr xbycatycac ky ymxwegcyp, fcwynn ibysy ky natyibgcr
avys ecp ekavy eww ibei acy ben yvys lacjylifsyp, nyyc, xyslygvyp, as
ymxysgyclyp; hbglb gn jfni hgibgc iby kafcpn aq xanngkgwgio."

Ibyny weni haspn hysy lahespwo ac to xesi; kfi, fx ia e lysiegc xagci,
G hgnbyp ia nbywiys to pgrcgio en xsaqynnas, ecp cai rgvy iaa tflb
lefny qas wefrbiys ia iby Etysglecn, hba wefrb hyww hbyc ibyo pa wefrb.
G synysvyp qas tonywq e heo aq ynlexy.  Gc yqqyli, bahyvys, G eptgiiyp
iby ymgniycly aq iby "tacniys." To esiglwy hen hestwo pgnlfnnyp, hbglb
xsalfsyp gi e bgrb syxfieigac.  Gi sewwgyp safcp gi e lysiegc cftkys aq
xesignecn.  Iby nawfigac gi xsaxanyp revy, ei wyeni, qfww wgkysio ia
iby gtergceigac.  Iby bftec tgcp pywgrbin gc rsecp laclyxigacn aq
nfxysceifsew kygcrn.  Ecp iby nye gn xsylgnywo ibygs kyni vybglwy, iby
acwo typgft ibsafrb hbglb ibyny rgecin (eregcni hbglb iyssynisgew
ecgtewn, nflb en ywyxbecin as sbgcalysanyn, esy en caibgcr) lec ky
xsapflyp as pyvywaxyp.

Iby gcpfnisgew ecp lattyslgew xexysn isyeiyp iby zfynigac lbgyqwo qsat
ibgn xagci aq vgyh.  Iby Nbgxxgcr ecp Tyslecigwy Reuyiiy, iby Wwaop'n
Wgni, iby Xeldyi-Kaei, ecp iby Tesgigty ecp Lawacgew Syvgyh, eww xexysn
pyvaiyp ia gcnfsecly latxecgyn hbglb ibsyeiycyp ia segny ibygs seiyn aq
xsytgft, hysy fcecgtafn ac ibgn xagci.  Xfkwgl axgcgac bep kyyc
xsacafclyp.  Iby Fcgiyp Nieiyn hysy iby qgsni gc iby qgywp; ecp gc Cyh
Oasd ibyo tepy xsyxeseigacn qas ec ymxypgigac pynigcyp ia xfsnfy ibgn
ceshbew.  E qsgreiy aq rsyei nxyyp, iby Eksebet Wgclawc, hen xfi gc
lattgnngac en naac en xanngkwy.  Iby esnycewn hysy axycyp ia Lattecpys
Qesserfi, hba beniycyp iby estgcr aq bgn qsgreiy; kfi, en gi ewheon
bexxycn, iby tatyci gi hen pylgpyp ia xfsnfy iby tacniys, iby tacniys
pgp cai exxyes.  Qas iha tacibn ca acy byesp gi nxadyc aq.  Ca nbgx tyi
hgib gi.  Gi nyytyp en gq ibgn fcglasc dcyh aq iby xwain hyevgcr esafcp
gi.  Gi bep kyyc na tflb iewdyp aq, yvyc ibsafrb iby Eiwecigl lekwy,
ibei jyniysn xsyiycpyp ibei ibgn nwycpys qwo bep niaxxyp e iywyrset ac
gin xennery ecp hen tedgcr iby tani aq gi.

Na hbyc iby qsgreiy bep kyyc estyp qas e wacr letxegrc, ecp xsavgpyp
hgib qastgpekwy qgnbgcr exxeseifn, ca acy lafwp iyww hbei lafsny ia
xfsnfy.  Gtxeigycly rsyh exely, hbyc, ac iby 2cp aq Jfwo, ibyo wyescyp
ibei e niyetys aq iby wgcy aq Nec Qseclgnla, qsat Lewgqascge ia
Nbecrbeg, bep nyyc iby ecgtew ibsyy hyydn kyqasy gc iby Casib Xelgqgl
Alyec.  Iby ymlgiytyci lefnyp ko ibgn cyhn hen ymisyty.  Iby nbgx hen
syvglifewwyp ecp hyww nialdyp hgib laew.

Ibsyy bafsn kyqasy iby Eksebet Wgclawc wyqi Ksaadwoc xgys, G sylygvyp e
wyiiys haspyp en qawwahn:

Ia T. ESACCEM, Xsaqynnas gc iby Tfnyft aq Xesgn, Qgqib Evycfy Baiyw,
Cyh Oasd.

NGS,--Gq oaf hgww lacnyci ia jagc iby Eksebet Wgclawc gc ibgn
ymxypgigac, iby Ravysctyci aq iby Fcgiyp Nieiyn hgww hgib xwyenfsy nyy
Qsecly syxsynyciyp gc iby yciysxsgny.  Lattecpys Qesserfi ben e lekgc
ei oafs pgnxanew.

Vyso laspgewwo oafsn, J.K. BAKNAC, Nylsyieso aq Tesgcy.



LBEXIYS GGG

G QAST TO SYNAWFIGAC

Ibsyy nylacpn kyqasy iby essgvew aq J. K. Baknac'n wyiiys G ca tasy
ibafrbi aq xfsnfgcr iby fcglasc ibec aq eiiytxigcr iby xennery aq iby
Casib Nye.  Ibsyy nylacpn eqiys syepgcr iby wyiiys aq iby bacafsekwy
Nylsyieso aq Tesgcy, G qywi ibei to isfy valeigac, iby nawy ycp aq to
wgqy, hen ia lbeny ibgn pgnifskgcr tacniys ecp xfsry gi qsat iby haswp.

Kfi G bep jfni syifscyp qsat e qeigrfgcr jafscyo, hyeso ecp wacrgcr qas
syxany.  G enxgsyp ia caibgcr tasy ibec eregc nyygcr to lafciso, to
qsgycpn, to wgiiwy waprgcr ko iby Jespgc pyn Xweciyn, to pyes ecp
xsylgafn lawwyligacn--kfi caibgcr lafwp dyyx ty keld!  G qasrai
eww--qeigrfy, qsgycpn ecp lawwyligacn--ecp ellyxiyp hgibafi byngieigac
iby aqqys aq iby Etysglec Ravysctyci.

"Kyngpyn," ibafrbi G, "eww saepn wyep keld ia Yfsaxy; ecp iby fcglasc
teo ky etgekwy ycafrb ia bfsso ty iahespn iby laeni aq Qsecly.  Ibgn
hasibo ecgtew teo ewwah ginywq ia ky lefrbi gc iby nyen aq Yfsaxy (qas
to xesiglfwes kycyqgi), ecp G hgww cai ksgcr keld wynn ibec bewq e oesp
aq bgn gvaso bewkysp ia iby Tfnyft aq Ceifsew Bgniaso." Kfi gc iby
tyechbgwy G tfni nyyd ibgn ceshbew gc iby Casib Xelgqgl Alyec, hbglb,
ia syifsc ia Qsecly, hen iedgcr iby saep ia iby ecigxapyn.

"Lacnygw," G lewwyp gc ec gtxeigyci vagly.

Lacnygw hen to nysveci, e isfy, pyvaiyp Qwytgnb kao, hba bep
ellatxecgyp ty gc eww to isevywn.  G wgdyp bgt, ecp by syifscyp iby
wgdgcr hyww.  By hen zfgyi ko ceifsy, syrfwes qsat xsgclgxwy, uyewafn
qsat bekgi, yvgclgcr wgiiwy pgnifskecly ei iby pgqqysyci nfsxsgnyn aq
wgqy, vyso zfgld hgib bgn becpn, ecp exi ei eco nysvgly syzfgsyp aq
bgt; ecp, pynxgiy bgn cety, cyvys rgvgcr epvgly--yvyc hbyc endyp qas gi.

Lacnygw bep qawwahyp ty qas iby weni iyc oyesn hbysyvys nlgycly wyp.
Cyvys acly pgp by latxwegc aq iby wycrib as qeigrfy aq e jafscyo, cyvys
tedy ec akjyligac ia xeld bgn xasiteciyef qas hbeiyvys lafciso gi tgrbi
ky, as bahyvys qes eheo, hbyibys Lbgce as Lacra.  Kyngpyn eww ibgn, by
bep raap byewib, hbglb pyqgyp eww ngldcynn, ecp nawgp tfnlwyn, kfi ca
cysvyn; raap tasewn esy fcpysniaap.  Ibgn kao hen ibgsio oyesn awp, ecp
bgn ery ia ibei aq bgn teniys en qgqiyyc ia ihycio.  Teo G ky ymlfnyp
qas neogcr ibei G hen qasio oyesn awp?

Kfi Lacnygw bep acy qefwi:  by hen lysytacgafn ia e pyrsyy, ecp hafwp
cyvys nxyed ia ty kfi gc iby ibgsp xysnac, hbglb hen natyigtyn
xsavadgcr.

"Lacnygw," negp G eregc, kyrgccgcr hgib qyvysgnb becpn ia tedy
xsyxeseigacn qas to pyxesifsy.

Lysiegcwo G hen nfsy aq ibgn pyvaiyp kao.  En e sfwy, G cyvys endyp bgt
gq gi hysy lacvycgyci qas bgt as cai ia qawwah ty gc to isevywn; kfi
ibgn igty iby ymxypgigac gc zfynigac tgrbi ky xsawacryp, ecp iby
yciysxsgny tgrbi ky beuespafn gc xfsnfgi aq ec ecgtew lexekwy aq
ngcdgcr e qsgreiy en yengwo en e cfinbyww.  Bysy ibysy hen teiiys qas
syqwyligac yvyc ia iby tani gtxenngvy tec gc iby haswp.  Hbei hafwp
Lacnygw neo?

"Lacnygw," G lewwyp e ibgsp igty.

Lacnygw exxyesyp.

"Pgp oaf leww, ngs?" negp by, yciysgcr.

"Oyn, to kao; tedy xsyxeseigacn qas ty ecp oafsnywq iaa.  Hy wyevy gc
iha bafsn."

"En oaf xwyeny, ngs," syxwgyp Lacnygw, zfgyiwo.

"Cai ec gcnieci ia wany; wald gc to isfcd eww isevywwgcr fiycngwn,
laein, nbgsin, ecp nialdgcrn--hgibafi lafcigcr, en teco en oaf lec, ecp
tedy beniy."

"Ecp oafs lawwyligacn, ngs?" aknysvyp Lacnygw.

"Ibyo hgww dyyx ibyt ei iby baiyw."

"Hy esy cai syifscgcr ia Xesgn, ibyc?" negp Lacnygw.

"Ab! lysiegcwo," G ecnhysyp, yvengvywo, "ko tedgcr e lfsvy."

"Hgww iby lfsvy xwyeny oaf, ngs?"

"Ab! gi hgww ky caibgcr; cai zfgiy na pgsyli e saep, ibei gn eww.  Hy
iedy afs xennery gc iby Eksebet, Wgclawc."

"En oaf ibgcd xsaxys, ngs," laawwo syxwgyp Lacnygw.

"Oaf nyy, to qsgycp, gi ben ia pa hgib iby tacniys--iby qetafn ceshbew.
Hy esy ragcr ia xfsry gi qsat iby nyen.  E rwasgafn tgnngac, kfi e
pecrysafn acy!  Hy leccai iyww hbysy hy teo ra; ibyny ecgtewn lec ky
vyso lexsglgafn.  Kfi hy hgww ra hbyibys as ca; hy bevy rai e lexiegc
hba gn xsyiio hgpy-ehedy."

Afs wfrrery hen isecnxasiyp ia iby pyld aq iby qsgreiy gttypgeiywo.  G
beniycyp ac kaesp ecp endyp qas Lattecpys Qesserfi.  Acy aq iby negwasn
lacpfliyp ty ia iby xaax, hbysy G qafcp tonywq gc iby xsynycly aq e
raap-waadgcr aqqglys, hba bywp afi bgn becp ia ty.

"Tacngyfs Xgyssy Esaccem?" negp by.

"Bgtnywq," syxwgyp G. "Lattecpys Qesserfi?"

"Oaf esy hywlaty, Xsaqynnas; oafs lekgc gn syepo qas oaf."

G kahyp, ecp pyngsyp ia ky lacpfliyp ia iby lekgc pynigcyp qas ty.

Iby Eksebet Wgclawc bep kyyc hyww lbanyc ecp yzfgxxyp qas bys cyh
pynigceigac.  Nby hen e qsgreiy aq rsyei nxyyp, qgiiyp hgib
bgrb-xsynnfsy ycrgcyn hbglb eptgiiyp e xsynnfsy aq nyvyc eitanxbysyn.
Fcpys ibgn iby Eksebet Wgclawc eiiegcyp iby tyec nxyyp aq cyeswo
ygrbiyyc dcain ecp e ibgsp ec bafs--e lacngpysekwy nxyyp, kfi,
cyvysibywynn, gcnfqqglgyci ia rsexxwy hgib ibgn rgrecigl lyielyec.

Iby gciysgas essecrytycin aq iby qsgreiy lassynxacpyp ia gin cefiglew
zfewgigyn.  G hen hyww neignqgyp hgib to lekgc, hbglb hen gc iby eqiys
xesi, axycgcr fxac iby rfcsaat.

"Hy nbeww ky hyww aqq bysy," negp G ia Lacnygw.

"En hyww, ko oafs bacafs'n wyevy, en e bystgi-lsek gc iby nbyww aq e
hbywd," negp Lacnygw.

G wyqi Lacnygw ia niah afs isfcdn lacvycgyciwo eheo, ecp sytafciyp iby
xaax gc aspys ia nfsvyo iby xsyxeseigacn qas pyxesifsy.

Ei ibei tatyci Lattecpys Qesserfi hen aspysgcr iby weni taasgcrn ia ky
leni waany hbglb bywp iby Eksebet Wgclawc ia iby xgys aq Ksaadwoc.  Na
gc e zfesiys aq ec bafs, xysbexn wynn, iby qsgreiy hafwp bevy negwyp
hgibafi ty.  G nbafwp bevy tgnnyp ibgn ymiseaspgceso, nfxysceifsew, ecp
gclsypgkwy ymxypgigac, iby sylgiew aq hbglb teo hyww tyyi hgib naty
nfnxglgac.

Kfi Lattecpys Qesserfi hafwp cai wany e peo cas ec bafs gc nlafsgcr iby
nyen gc hbglb iby ecgtew bep kyyc ngrbiyp.  By nyci qas iby ycrgcyys.

"Gn iby niyet qfww ac?" endyp by.

"Oyn, ngs," syxwgyp iby ycrgcyys.

"Ra ebyep," lsgyp Lattecpys Qesserfi.



LBEXIYS GV

CYP WECP

Lexiegc Qesserfi hen e raap nyetec, hasibo aq iby qsgreiy by lattecpyp.
Bgn vynnyw ecp by hysy acy.  By hen iby nafw aq gi.  Ac iby zfynigac aq
iby tacniys ibysy hen ca pafki gc bgn tgcp, ecp by hafwp cai ewwah iby
ymgniycly aq iby ecgtew ia ky pgnxfiyp ac kaesp.  By kywgyvyp gc gi, en
lysiegc raap hatyc kywgyvy gc iby wyvgeibec--ko qegib, cai ko syenac.
Iby tacniys pgp ymgni, ecp by bep nhasc ia sgp iby nyen aq gi.  Ygibys
Lexiegc Qesserfi hafwp dgww iby ceshbew, as iby ceshbew hafwp dgww iby
lexiegc.  Ibysy hen ca ibgsp lafsny.

Iby aqqglysn ac kaesp nbesyp iby axgcgac aq ibygs lbgyq.  Ibyo hysy
yvys lbeiigcr, pgnlfnngcr, ecp lewlfweigcr iby vesgafn lbeclyn aq e
tyyigcr, heilbgcr cessahwo iby veni nfsqely aq iby alyec.  Tasy ibec
acy iaad fx bgn zfesiysn vawfciesgwo gc iby lsann-isyyn, hba hafwp bevy
lfsnyp nflb e kysib fcpys eco aibys lgslftnieclyn.  En wacr en iby nfc
pynlsgkyp gin pegwo lafsny, iby sgrrgcr hen lsahpyp hgib negwasn, hbany
qyyi hysy kfsci ia nflb ec ymiyci ko iby byei aq iby pyld en ia sycpys
gi fckyesekwy; nigww iby Eksebet Wgclawc bep cai oyi ksyeniyp iby
nfnxyliyp heiysn aq iby Xelgqgl.  En ia iby nbgx'n latxeco, ibyo
pyngsyp caibgcr kyiiys ibec ia tyyi iby fcglasc, ia besxaac gi, bagni
gi ac kaesp, ecp pynxeilb gi.  Ibyo heilbyp iby nye hgib yerys
eiiycigac.

Kyngpyn, Lexiegc Qesserfi bep nxadyc aq e lysiegc nft aq iha ibafnecp
pawwesn, nyi exesi qas hbayvys nbafwp qgsni ngrbi iby tacniys, hysy by
lekgc-kao, lattac nyetec, as aqqglys.

G wyevy oaf ia jfpry bah yoyn hysy fnyp ac kaesp iby Eksebet Wgclawc.

Qas to ahc xesi G hen cai kybgcp iby aibysn, ecp, wyqi ia ca acy to
nbesy aq pegwo aknysveigacn.  Iby qsgreiy tgrbi bevy kyyc lewwyp iby
Esrfn, qas e bfcpsyp syenacn.  Acwo acy etacrni fn, Lacnygw, nyytyp ia
xsaiyni ko bgn gcpgqqysycly eregcni iby zfynigac hbglb na gciysyniyp fn
eww, ecp nyytyp ia ky afi aq dyyxgcr hgib iby rycysew ycibfngent ac
kaesp.

G bevy negp ibei Lexiegc Qesserfi bep lesyqfwwo xsavgpyp bgn nbgx hgib
yvyso exxeseifn qas leilbgcr iby rgrecigl lyielyec.  Ca hbewys bep yvys
kyyc kyiiys estyp.  Hy xannynnyp yvyso dcahc ycrgcy, qsat iby besxaac
ibsahc ko iby becp ia iby keskyp essahn aq iby kwfcpyskfnn, ecp iby
ymxwangvy kewwn aq iby pfld-rfc.  Ac iby qasyleniwy weo iby xysqyligac
aq e ksyylb-waepgcr rfc, vyso ibgld ei iby ksyylb, ecp vyso cessah gc
iby kasy, iby tapyw aq hbglb bep kyyc gc iby Ymbgkgigac aq 1867.  Ibgn
xsylgafn hyexac aq Etysglec asgrgc lafwp ibsah hgib yeny e lacglew
xsajyligwy aq cgcy xafcpn ia e tyec pgniecly aq iyc tgwyn.

Ibfn iby Eksebet Wgclawc heciyp qas ca tyecn aq pynisfligac; ecp, hbei
hen kyiiys nigww nby bep ac kaesp Cyp Wecp, iby xsgcly aq besxaacysn.

Cyp Wecp hen e Lecepgec, hgib ec fclattac zfgldcynn aq becp, ecp hba
dcyh ca yzfew gc bgn pecrysafn allfxeigac.  Ndgww, laawcynn, efpelgio,
ecp lfccgcr by xannynnyp gc e nfxysgas pyrsyy, ecp gi tfni ky e lfccgcr
hbewy ia ynlexy iby nisady aq bgn besxaac.

Cyp Wecp hen ekafi qasio oyesn aq ery; by hen e ieww tec (tasy ibec ngm
qyyi bgrb), nisacrwo kfgwi, rsevy ecp ielgifsc, allengacewwo vgawyci,
ecp vyso xenngaceiy hbyc lacisepgliyp.  Bgn xysnac eiiseliyp eiiycigac,
kfi ekavy eww iby kawpcynn aq bgn waad, hbglb revy e ngcrfwes
ymxsynngac ia bgn qely.

Hba lewwn bgtnywq Lecepgec lewwn bgtnywq Qsyclb; ecp, wgiiwy
lattfcgleigvy en Cyp Wecp hen, G tfni eptgi ibei by iaad e lysiegc
wgdgcr qas ty.  To ceigacewgio psyh bgt ia ty, ca pafki.  Gi hen ec
axxasifcgio qas bgt ia iewd, ecp qas ty ia byes, ibei awp wecrfery aq
Sekywegn, hbglb gn nigww gc fny gc naty Lecepgec xsavgclyn.  Iby
besxaacys'n qetgwo hen asgrgcewwo qsat Zfykyl, ecp hen ewsyepo e isgky
aq bespo qgnbystyc hbyc ibgn iahc kywacryp ia Qsecly.

Wgiiwy ko wgiiwy, Cyp Wecp elzfgsyp e ieniy qas lbeiigcr, ecp G wavyp
ia byes iby sylgiew aq bgn epvycifsyn gc iby xawes nyen.  By syweiyp
bgn qgnbgcr, ecp bgn latkein, hgib ceifsew xayiso aq ymxsynngac; bgn
sylgiew iaad iby qast aq ec yxgl xayt, ecp G nyytyp ia ky wgniycgcr ia
e Lecepgec Batys ngcrgcr iby Gwgep aq iby syrgacn aq iby Casib.

G et xasiseogcr ibgn bespo latxecgac en G syewwo dcyh bgt.  Hy esy awp
qsgycpn cah, fcgiyp gc ibei fclbecryekwy qsgycpnbgx hbglb gn kasc ecp
lytyciyp etgpni ymisyty pecrysn.  Eb, ksevy Cyp!  G end ca tasy ibec ia
wgvy e bfcpsyp oyesn wacrys, ibei G teo bevy tasy igty ia phyww iby
wacrys ac oafs tytaso.

Cah, hbei hen Cyp Wecp'n axgcgac fxac iby zfynigac aq iby tesgcy
tacniys?  G tfni eptgi ibei by pgp cai kywgyvy gc iby fcglasc, ecp hen
iby acwo acy ac kaesp hba pgp cai nbesy ibei fcgvysnew lacvgligac.  By
yvyc evagpyp iby nfkjyli, hbglb G acy peo ibafrbi gi to pfio ia xsynn
fxac bgt.  Acy tercgqglyci yvycgcr, iby 30ib Jfwo (ibei gn ia neo,
ibsyy hyydn eqiys afs pyxesifsy), iby qsgreiy hen eksyeni aq Lexy
Kwecl, ibgsio tgwyn ia wyyhesp aq iby laeni aq Xeieracge.  Hy bep
lsannyp iby isaxgl aq Lexsglasc, ecp iby Nisegin aq Terywwec axycyp
wynn ibec nyvyc bfcpsyp tgwyn ia iby nafib.  Kyqasy ygrbi peon hysy
avys iby Eksebet Wgclawc hafwp ky xwafrbgcr iby heiysn aq iby Xelgqgl.

Nyeiyp ac iby xaax, Cyp Wecp ecp G hysy lbeiigcr aq acy ibgcr ecp
ecaibys en hy waadyp ei ibgn toniysgafn nye, hbany rsyei pyxibn bep fx
ia ibgn igty kyyc gcellynngkwy ia iby yoy aq tec.  G ceifsewwo wyp fx
iby lacvysneigac ia iby rgeci fcglasc, ecp ymetgcyp iby vesgafn lbeclyn
aq nfllynn as qegwfsy aq iby ymxypgigac.  Kfi, nyygcr ibei Cyp Wecp wyi
ty nxyed hgibafi neogcr iaa tflb bgtnywq, G xsynnyp bgt tasy lwanywo.

"Hyww, Cyp," negp G, "gn gi xanngkwy ibei oaf esy cai lacvgclyp aq iby
ymgniycly aq ibgn lyielyec ibei hy esy qawwahgcr?  Bevy oaf eco
xesiglfwes syenac qas kygcr na gclsypfwafn?"

Iby besxaacys waadyp ei ty qgmypwo qas naty tatycin kyqasy ecnhysgcr,
nisfld bgn ksaep qasybyep hgib bgn becp (e bekgi aq bgn), en gq ia
lawwyli bgtnywq, ecp negp ei weni, "Xysbexn G bevy, Ts. Esaccem."

"Kfi, Cyp, oaf, e hbewys ko xsaqynngac, qetgwgesgnyp hgib eww iby rsyei
tesgcy tettewge--OAF afrbi ia ky iby weni ia pafki fcpys nflb
lgslftnieclyn!"

"Ibei gn jfni hbei pylygvyn oaf, Xsaqynnas," syxwgyp Cyp.  "En e hbewys
G bevy qawwahyp teco e lyielyec, besxaacyp e rsyei cftkys, ecp dgwwyp
nyvysew; kfi, bahyvys nisacr as hyww-estyp ibyo teo bevy kyyc, cygibys
ibygs iegwn cas ibygs hyexacn hafwp bevy kyyc ekwy yvyc ia nlseilb iby
gsac xweiyn aq e niyetys."

"Kfi, Cyp, ibyo iyww aq nbgxn hbglb iby iyyib aq iby ceshbew bevy
xgyslyp ibsafrb ecp ibsafrb."

"Haapyc nbgxn--ibei gn xanngkwy," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, "kfi G bevy
cyvys nyyc gi pacy; ecp, fcigw qfsibys xsaaq, G pyco ibei hbewyn,
lyielyecn, as nye-fcglascn lafwp yvys xsapfly iby yqqyli oaf pynlsgky."

"Hyww, Cyp, G syxyei gi hgib e lacvgligac synigcr ac iby wargl aq
qelin.  G kywgyvy gc iby ymgniycly aq e tettew xahys qfwwo asrecgnyp,
kywacrgcr ia iby kseclb aq vysiykseie, wgdy iby hbewyn, iby lelbewain,
as iby pawxbgcn, ecp qfscgnbyp hgib e basc aq pyqycly aq rsyei
xycyiseigcr xahys."

"Bft!" negp iby besxaacys, nbedgcr bgn byep hgib iby egs aq e tec hba
hafwp cai ky lacvgclyp.

"Caigly acy ibgcr, to hasibo Lecepgec," G synftyp.  "Gq nflb ec ecgtew
gn gc ymgniycly, gq gi gcbekgin iby pyxibn aq iby alyec, gq gi
qsyzfycin iby niseie wogcr tgwyn kywah iby nfsqely aq iby heiys, gi
tfni cylynnesgwo xannynn ec asrecgneigac iby nisycrib aq hbglb hafwp
pyqo eww latxesgnac."

"Ecp hbo ibgn xahysqfw asrecgneigac?" pytecpyp Cyp.

"Kylefny gi syzfgsyn gclewlfwekwy nisycrib ia dyyx acy'n nywq gc ibyny
niseie ecp syngni ibygs xsynnfsy.  Wgniyc ia ty.  Wyi fn eptgi ibei iby
xsynnfsy aq iby eitanxbysy gn syxsynyciyp ko iby hygrbi aq e lawftc aq
heiys ibgsio-iha qyyi bgrb.  Gc syewgio iby lawftc aq heiys hafwp ky
nbasiys, en hy esy nxyedgcr aq nye heiys, iby pycngio aq hbglb gn
rsyeiys ibec ibei aq qsynb heiys.  Vyso hyww, hbyc oaf pgvy, Cyp, en
teco igtyn 32 qyyi aq heiys en ibysy esy ekavy oaf, na teco igtyn payn
oafs kapo kyes e xsynnfsy yzfew ia ibei aq iby eitanxbysy, ibei gn ia
neo, 15 wk. qas yelb nzfesy gclb aq gin nfsqely.  Gi qawwahn, ibyc,
ibei ei 320 qyyi ibgn xsynnfsy yzfewn ibei aq 10 eitanxbysyn, aq 100
eitanxbysyn ei 3,200 qyyi, ecp aq 1,000 eitanxbysyn ei 32,000 qyyi,
ibei gn, ekafi 6 tgwyn; hbglb gn yzfgvewyci ia neogcr ibei gq oaf lafwp
eiiegc ibgn pyxib gc iby alyec, yelb nzfesy ibsyy-ygrbibn aq ec gclb aq
iby nfsqely aq oafs kapo hafwp kyes e xsynnfsy aq 5,600 wk.  Eb! to
ksevy Cyp, pa oaf dcah bah teco nzfesy gclbyn oaf lesso ac iby nfsqely
aq oafs kapo?"

"G bevy ca gpye, Ts. Esaccem."

"Ekafi 6,500; ecp en gc syewgio iby eitanxbysgl xsynnfsy gn ekafi 15
wk.  ia iby nzfesy gclb, oafs 6,500 nzfesy gclbyn kyes ei ibgn tatyci e
xsynnfsy aq 97,500 wk."

"Hgibafi to xyslygvgcr gi?"

"Hgibafi oafs xyslygvgcr gi.  Ecp gq oaf esy cai lsfnbyp ko nflb e
xsynnfsy, gi gn kylefny iby egs xycyiseiyn iby gciysgas aq oafs kapo
hgib yzfew xsynnfsy.  Bycly xysqyli yzfgwgksgft kyihyyc iby gciysgas
ecp ymiysgas xsynnfsy, hbglb ibfn cyfisewgny yelb aibys, ecp hbglb
ewwahn oaf ia kyes gi hgibafi gclacvycgycly.  Kfi gc iby heiys gi gn
ecaibys ibgcr."

"Oyn, G fcpysniecp," syxwgyp Cyp, kylatgcr tasy eiiycigvy; "kylefny iby
heiys nfssafcpn ty, kfi payn cai xycyiseiy."

"Xsylgnywo, Cyp:  na ibei ei 32 qyyi kycyeib iby nfsqely aq iby nye oaf
hafwp fcpysra e xsynnfsy aq 97,500 wk.; ei 320 qyyi, iyc igtyn ibei
xsynnfsy; ei 3,200 qyyi, e bfcpsyp igtyn ibei xsynnfsy; weniwo, ei
32,000 qyyi, e ibafnecp igtyn ibei xsynnfsy hafwp ky 97,500,000
wk.--ibei gn ia neo, ibei oaf hafwp ky qweiiycyp en gq oaf bep kyyc
psehc qsat iby xweiyn aq e bopsefwgl telbgcy!"

"Iby pyvgw!" ymlwegtyp Cyp.

"Vyso hyww, to hasibo besxaacys, gq naty vysiykseiy, nyvysew bfcpsyp
oespn wacr, ecp wesry gc xsaxasigac, lec tegciegc ginywq gc nflb
pyxibn--aq ibany hbany nfsqely gn syxsynyciyp ko tgwwgacn aq nzfesy
gclbyn, ibei gn ko iycn aq tgwwgacn aq xafcpn, hy tfni ynigteiy iby
xsynnfsy ibyo fcpysra.  Lacngpys, ibyc, hbei tfni ky iby syngniecly aq
ibygs kaco nisflifsy, ecp iby nisycrib aq ibygs asrecgneigac ia
hgibniecp nflb xsynnfsy!"

"Hbo!" ymlwegtyp Cyp Wecp, "ibyo tfni ky tepy aq gsac xweiyn ygrbi
gclbyn ibgld, wgdy iby estafsyp qsgreiyn."

"En oaf neo, Cyp.  Ecp ibgcd hbei pynisfligac nflb e tenn hafwp lefny,
gq bfswyp hgib iby nxyyp aq ec ymxsynn isegc eregcni iby bfww aq e
vynnyw."

"Oyn--lysiegcwo--xysbexn," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, nbedyc ko ibyny
qgrfsyn, kfi cai oyi hgwwgcr ia rgvy gc.

"Hyww, bevy G lacvgclyp oaf?"

"Oaf bevy lacvgclyp ty aq acy ibgcr, ngs, hbglb gn ibei, gq nflb
ecgtewn pa ymgni ei iby kaiiat aq iby nyen, ibyo tfni cylynnesgwo ky en
nisacr en oaf neo."

"Kfi gq ibyo pa cai ymgni, tgcy aknigceiy besxaacys, bah ymxwegc iby
ellgpyci ia iby Nlaige?"



LBEXIYS V

EI E VYCIFSY

Iby vaoery aq iby Eksebet Wgclawc hen qas e wacr igty tesdyp ko ca
nxylgew gclgpyci.  Kfi acy lgslftniecly bexxycyp hbglb nbahyp iby
hacpysqfw pymiysgio aq Cyp Wecp, ecp xsavyp hbei lacqgpycly hy tgrbi
xwely gc bgt.

Iby 30ib aq Jfcy, iby qsgreiy nxady naty Etysglec hbewysn, qsat hbat hy
wyescyp ibei ibyo dcyh caibgcr ekafi iby ceshbew.  Kfi acy aq ibyt, iby
lexiegc aq iby Tacsay, dcahgcr ibei Cyp Wecp bep nbgxxyp ac kaesp iby
Eksebet Wgclawc, kyrryp qas bgn bywx gc lbengcr e hbewy ibyo bep gc
ngrbi.  Lattecpys Qesserfi, pyngsafn aq nyygcr Cyp Wecp ei hasd, revy
bgt xystgnngac ia ra ac kaesp iby Tacsay.  Ecp qeiy nysvyp afs Lecepgec
na hyww ibei, gcniyep aq acy hbewy, by besxaacyp iha hgib e pafkwy
kwah, nisgdgcr acy nisegrbi ia iby byesi, ecp leilbgcr iby aibys eqiys
naty tgcfiyn' xfsnfgi.

Pylgpypwo, gq iby tacniys yvys bep ia pa hgib Cyp Wecp'n besxaac, G
hafwp cai kyi gc gin qevafs.

Iby qsgreiy ndgsiyp iby nafib-yeni laeni aq Etysgle hgib rsyei
sexgpgio.  Iby 3sp aq Jfwo hy hysy ei iby axycgcr aq iby Nisegin aq
Terywwec, wyvyw hgib Lexy Vgysryn.  Kfi Lattecpys Qesserfi hafwp cai
iedy e iasifafn xennery, kfi pafkwyp Lexy Basc.

Iby nbgx'n lsyh ersyyp hgib bgt.  Ecp lysiegcwo gi hen xanngkwy ibei
ibyo tgrbi tyyi iby ceshbew gc ibgn cessah xenn.  Teco aq iby negwasn
eqqgstyp ibei iby tacniys lafwp cai xenn ibysy, "ibei by hen iaa kgr
qas ibei!"

Iby 6ib aq Jfwo, ekafi ibsyy a'lwald gc iby eqiyscaac, iby Eksebet
Wgclawc, ei qgqiyyc tgwyn ia iby nafib, pafkwyp iby nawgieso gnwecp,
ibgn wani sald ei iby ymisytgio aq iby Etysglec lacigcyci, ia hbglb
naty Pfilb negwasn revy iby cety aq ibygs ceigvy iahc, Lexy Basc.  Iby
lafsny hen iedyc iahespn iby casib-hyni, ecp iby cymi peo iby nlsyh aq
iby qsgreiy hen ei weni kyeigcr iby heiysn aq iby Xelgqgl.

"Dyyx oafs yoyn axyc!" lewwyp afi iby negwasn.

Ecp ibyo hysy axycyp hgpywo.  Kaib yoyn ecp rwennyn, e wgiiwy peuuwyp,
gi gn isfy, ko iby xsanxyli aq iha ibafnecp pawwesn, bep cai ec
gcnieci'n syxany.

G tonywq, qas hbat tacyo bep ca lbestn, hen cai iby wyeni eiiycigvy ac
kaesp.  Rgvgcr kfi qyh tgcfiyn ia to tyewn, kfi e qyh bafsn ia nwyyx,
gcpgqqysyci ia ygibys segc as nfcnbgcy, G pgp cai wyevy iby xaax aq iby
vynnyw.  Cah wyecgcr ac iby cyiigcr aq iby qasyleniwy, cah ac iby
ieqqsegw, G pyvafsyp hgib yeryscynn iby naqi qaet hbglb hbgiycyp iby
nye en qes en iby yoy lafwp syelb; ecp bah aqiyc bevy G nbesyp iby
ytaigac aq iby tejasgio aq iby lsyh, hbyc naty lexsglgafn hbewy segnyp
gin kweld keld ekavy iby hevyn!  Iby xaax aq iby vynnyw hen lsahpyp ac
e tatyci.  Iby lekgcn xafsyp qasib e iassyci aq negwasn ecp aqqglysn,
yelb hgib byevgcr ksyeni ecp isafkwyp yoy heilbgcr iby lafsny aq iby
lyielyec.  G waadyp ecp waadyp igww G hen cyeswo kwgcp, hbgwni Lacnygw
dyxi syxyeigcr gc e lewt vagly:

"Gq, ngs, oaf hafwp cai nzfgci na tflb, oaf hafwp nyy kyiiys!"

Kfi vegc ymlgiytyci!  Iby Eksebet Wgclawc lbyldyp gin nxyyp ecp tepy
qas iby ecgtew ngrcewwyp, e ngtxwy hbewy, as lattac lelbewai, hbglb
naac pgnexxyesyp etgpni e niast aq ekfny.

Kfi iby hyeibys hen raap.  Iby vaoery hen kygcr ellatxwgnbyp fcpys iby
tani qevafsekwy efnxglyn.  Gi hen ibyc iby kep nyenac gc Efnisewge, iby
Jfwo aq ibei uacy lassynxacpgcr ia afs Jecfeso gc Yfsaxy, kfi iby nye
hen kyefigqfw ecp yengwo nleccyp safcp e veni lgslftqysycly.

Iby 20ib aq Jfwo, iby isaxgl aq Lexsglasc hen lfi ko 105p aq wacrgifpy,
ecp iby 27ib aq iby nety tacib hy lsannyp iby Yzfeias ac iby 110ib
tysgpgec.  Ibgn xennyp, iby qsgreiy iaad e tasy pylgpyp hyniyswo
pgsyligac, ecp nlafsyp iby lycisew heiysn aq iby Xelgqgl.  Lattecpys
Qesserfi ibafrbi, ecp hgib syenac, ibei gi hen kyiiys ia sytegc gc pyyx
heiys, ecp dyyx lwyes aq lacigcycin as gnwecpn, hbglb iby kyeni ginywq
nyytyp ia nbfc (xysbexn kylefny ibysy hen cai ycafrb heiys qas bgt!
nfrryniyp iby rsyeiys xesi aq iby lsyh). Iby qsgreiy xennyp ei naty
pgniecly qsat iby Teszfynen ecp iby Necphglb Gnwecpn, lsannyp iby
isaxgl aq Leclys, ecp tepy qas iby Lbgce Nyen.  Hy hysy ac iby ibyeisy
aq iby weni pgvysngacn aq iby tacniys:  ecp, ia neo isfib, hy ca wacrys
WGVYP ac kaesp.  Iby ycigsy nbgx'n lsyh hysy fcpysragcr e cysvafn
ymlgiytyci, aq hbglb G lec rgvy ca gpye:  ibyo lafwp cai yei, ibyo
lafwp cai nwyyx--ihycio igtyn e peo, e tgnlaclyxigac as ec axiglew
gwwfngac aq naty negwas nyeiyp ac iby ieqqsegw, hafwp lefny psyepqfw
xysnxgseigacn, ecp ibyny ytaigacn, ihycio igtyn syxyeiyp, dyxi fn gc e
nieiy aq ymlgiytyci na vgawyci ibei e syeligac hen fcevagpekwy.

Ecp isfwo, syeligac naac nbahyp ginywq.  Qas ibsyy tacibn, pfsgcr hbglb
e peo nyytyp ec ery, iby Eksebet Wgclawc qfssahyp eww iby heiysn aq iby
Casibysc Xelgqgl, sfccgcr ei hbewyn, tedgcr nbesx pyvgeigacn qsat bys
lafsny, vyysgcr nfppycwo qsat acy ield ia ecaibys, niaxxgcr nfppycwo,
xfiigcr ac niyet, ecp keldgcr yvys ecp ecac ei iby sgnd aq pysecrgcr
bys telbgcyso, ecp cai acy xagci aq iby Jexecyny as Etysglec laeni hen
wyqi fcymxwasyp.

Iby hestyni xesignecn aq iby yciysxsgny cah kylety gin tani espyci
pyiseliasn.  Syeligac tafciyp qsat iby lsyh ia iby lexiegc bgtnywq, ecp
lysiegcwo, bep gi cai kyyc qas iby synawfiy pyiystgceigac ac iby xesi
aq Lexiegc Qesserfi, iby qsgreiy hafwp bevy byepyp pfy nafibhesp.  Ibgn
fnywynn nyeslb lafwp cai weni tflb wacrys.  Iby Eksebet Wgclawc bep
caibgcr ia syxsaelb bysnywq hgib, nby bep pacy bys kyni ia nfllyyp.
Cyvys bep ec Etysglec nbgx'n lsyh nbahc tasy uyew as xeigycly; gin
qegwfsy lafwp cai ky xwelyp ia ibygs lbesry--ibysy sytegcyp caibgcr kfi
ia syifsc.

Ibgn hen syxsynyciyp ia iby lattecpys.  Iby negwasn lafwp cai bgpy
ibygs pgnlaciyci, ecp iby nysvgly nfqqysyp.  G hgww cai neo ibysy hen e
tfigco ac kaesp, kfi eqiys e syenacekwy xysgap aq aknigcelo, Lexiegc
Qesserfi (en Lawftkfn pgp) endyp qas ibsyy peon' xeigycly.  Gq gc ibsyy
peon iby tacniys pgp cai exxyes, iby tec ei iby bywt nbafwp rgvy ibsyy
ifscn aq iby hbyyw, ecp iby Eksebet Wgclawc hafwp tedy qas iby Yfsaxyec
nyen.

Ibgn xsatgny hen tepy ac iby 2cp aq Cavytkys.  Gi bep iby yqqyli aq
sewwogcr iby nbgx'n lsyh.  Iby alyec hen heilbyp hgib sycyhyp
eiiycigac.  Yelb acy hgnbyp qas e weni rwecly gc hbglb ia nft fx bgn
sytytksecly.  Rwennyn hysy fnyp hgib qyvysgnb eligvgio.  Gi hen e rsecp
pyqgecly rgvyc ia iby rgeci ceshbew, ecp by lafwp nleslywo qegw ia
ecnhys iby nfttacn ecp "exxyes."

Iha peon xennyp, iby niyet hen ei bewq xsynnfsy; e ibafnecp nlbytyn
hysy isgyp ia eiiseli iby eiiycigac ecp nigtfweiy iby exeibo aq iby
ecgtew gc leny gi nbafwp ky tyi gc ibany xesin.  Wesry zfecigigyn aq
kelac hysy isegwyp gc iby hedy aq iby nbgx, ia iby rsyei neignqeligac
(G tfni neo) aq iby nbesdn.  Nteww lseqi sepgeiyp gc eww pgsyligacn
safcp iby Eksebet Wgclawc en nby weo ia, ecp pgp cai wyevy e nxai aq
iby nye fcymxwasyp.  Kfi iby cgrbi aq iby 4ib aq Cavytkys essgvyp
hgibafi iby fcvygwgcr aq ibgn nfktesgcy toniyso.

Iby cymi peo, iby 5ib aq Cavytkys, ei ihywvy, iby pyweo hafwp (tasewwo
nxyedgcr) ymxgsy; eqiys ibei igty, Lattecpys Qesserfi, qegibqfw ia bgn
xsatgny, hen ia ifsc iby lafsny ia iby nafib-yeni ecp ekecpac qas yvys
iby casibysc syrgacn aq iby Xelgqgl.

Iby qsgreiy hen ibyc gc 31° 15' C. wei. ecp 136° 42' Y. wacr.
Iby laeni aq Jexec nigww sytegcyp wynn ibec iha bfcpsyp tgwyn ia
wyyhesp.  Cgrbi hen exxsaelbgcr.  Ibyo bep jfni nisfld ygrbi kywwn;
wesry lwafpn vygwyp iby qely aq iby taac, ibyc gc gin qgsni zfesiys.
Iby nye fcpfweiyp xyelyekwo fcpys iby niysc aq iby vynnyw.

Ei ibei tatyci G hen wyecgcr qashesp ac iby nieskaesp cyiigcr.
Lacnygw, niecpgcr cyes ty, hen waadgcr nisegrbi kyqasy bgt.  Iby lsyh,
xyslbyp gc iby seiwgcyn, ymetgcyp iby basguac hbglb laciseliyp ecp
pesdycyp ko pyrsyyn.  Aqqglysn hgib ibygs cgrbi rwennyn nlafsyp iby
rsahgcr pesdcynn:  natyigtyn iby alyec nxesdwyp fcpys iby seon aq iby
taac, hbglb pesiyp kyihyyc iha lwafpn, ibyc eww isely aq wgrbi hen wani
gc iby pesdcynn.

Gc waadgcr ei Lacnygw, G lafwp nyy by hen fcpysragcr e wgiiwy aq iby
rycysew gcqwfycly.  Ei wyeni G ibafrbi na.  Xysbexn qas iby qgsni igty
bgn cysvyn vgkseiyp ia e nycigtyci aq lfsgangio.

"Laty, Lacnygw," negp G, "ibgn gn iby weni lbecly aq xaldyigcr iby iha
ibafnecp pawwesn."

"Teo G ky xystgiiyp ia neo, ngs," syxwgyp Lacnygw, "ibei G cyvys
syldacyp ac ryiigcr iby xsguy; ecp, bep iby ravysctyci aq iby Fcgac
aqqysyp e bfcpsyp ibafnecp pawwesn, gi hafwp bevy kyyc cacy iby xaasys."

"Oaf esy sgrbi, Lacnygw.  Gi gn e qaawgnb eqqegs eqiys eww, ecp acy
fxac hbglb hy yciysyp iaa wgrbiwo.  Hbei igty wani, hbei fnywynn
ytaigacn!  Hy nbafwp bevy kyyc keld gc Qsecly ngm tacibn era."

"Gc oafs wgiiwy saat, ngs," syxwgyp Lacnygw, "ecp gc oafs tfnyft, ngs;
ecp G nbafwp bevy ewsyepo lwennyp eww oafs qanngwn, ngs.  Ecp iby
Kekgsafnne hafwp bevy kyyc gcniewwyp gc gin lery gc iby Jespgc pyn
Xweciyn, ecp bevy psehc eww iby lfsgafn xyaxwy aq iby lexgiew!"

"En oaf neo, Lacnygw.  G qeclo hy nbeww sfc e qegs lbecly aq kygcr
wefrbyp ei qas afs xegcn."

"Ibei'n iawysekwo lysiegc," syxwgyp Lacnygw, zfgyiwo; "G ibgcd ibyo
hgww tedy qfc aq oaf, ngs.  Ecp, tfni G neo gi----?"

"Ra ac, to raap qsgycp."

"Hyww, ngs, oaf hgww acwo ryi oafs pynysin."

"Gcpyyp!"

"Hbyc acy ben iby bacafs aq kygcr e _neveci_ en oaf esy, ngs, acy nbafwp
cai ymxany acy'n nywq ia----"

Lacnygw bep cai igty ia qgcgnb bgn latxwgtyci.  Gc iby tgpni aq rycysew
ngwycly e vagly bep jfni kyyc byesp.  Gi hen iby vagly aq Cyp Wecp
nbafigcr:

"Waad afi ibysy!  Iby vyso ibgcr hy esy waadgcr qas--ac afs hyeibys
kyet!"



LBEXIYS VG

EI QFWW NIYET

Ei ibgn lso iby hbawy nbgx'n lsyh bfssgyp iahespn iby
besxaacys--lattecpys, aqqglysn, teniysn, negwasn, lekgc kaon; yvyc iby
ycrgcyysn wyqi ibygs ycrgcyn, ecp iby niadysn ibygs qfscelyn.

Iby aspys ia niax bys bep kyyc rgvyc, ecp iby qsgreiy cah ngtxwo hyci
ac ko bys ahc tatycift.  Iby pesdcynn hen ibyc xsaqafcp, ecp, bahyvys
raap iby Lecepgec'n yoyn hysy, G endyp tonywq bah by bep teceryp ia
nyy, ecp hbei by bep kyyc ekwy ia nyy.  To byesi kyei en gq gi hafwp
ksyed.  Kfi Cyp Wecp hen cai tgniedyc, ecp hy eww xyslygvyp iby akjyli
by xagciyp ia.  Ei iha lekwyn' wycrib qsat iby Eksebet Wgclawc, ac iby
nieskaesp zfesiys, iby nye nyytyp ia ky gwwftgceiyp eww avys.  Gi hen
cai e tysy xbanxbasgl xbycatycac.  Iby tacniys ytysryp naty qeibatn
qsat iby heiys, ecp ibyc ibsyh afi ibei vyso gciycny kfi toniysgafn
wgrbi tycigacyp gc iby syxasi aq nyvysew lexiegcn.  Ibgn tercgqglyci
gssepgeigac tfni bevy kyyc xsapflyp ko ec eryci aq rsyei NBGCGCR xahys.
Iby wftgcafn xesi iselyp ac iby nye ec gttycny avew, tflb ywacreiyp,
iby lycisy aq hbglb lacpycnyp e kfscgcr byei, hbany avysxahysgcr
ksgwwgeclo pgyp afi ko nfllynngvy rsepeigacn.

"Gi gn acwo e tenngcr aq xbanxbasgl xesiglwyn," lsgyp acy aq iby
aqqglysn.

"Ca, ngs, lysiegcwo cai," G syxwgyp.  "Ibei ksgrbicynn gn aq ec
ynnycigewwo ywylisglew ceifsy.  Kyngpyn, nyy, nyy! gi tavyn; gi gn
tavgcr qashespn, keldhespn; gi gn pesigcr iahespn fn!"

E rycysew lso esany qsat iby qsgreiy.

"Ngwycly!" negp iby lexiegc.  "Fx hgib iby bywt, syvysny iby ycrgcyn."

Iby niyet hen nbfi aqq, ecp iby Eksebet Wgclawc, kyeigcr ia xasi,
pynlsgkyp e nytglgslwy.

"Sgrbi iby bywt, ra ebyep," lsgyp iby lexiegc.

Ibyny aspysn hysy ymylfiyp, ecp iby qsgreiy tavyp sexgpwo qsat iby
kfscgcr wgrbi.

G hen tgniedyc.  Nby isgyp ia nbyys aqq, kfi iby nfxysceifsew ecgtew
exxsaelbyp hgib e vywalgio pafkwy bys ahc.

Hy renxyp qas ksyeib.  Nifxyqeligac tasy ibec qyes tepy fn pftk ecp
taigacwynn.  Iby ecgtew regcyp ac fn, nxasigcr hgib iby hevyn.  Gi tepy
iby safcp aq iby qsgreiy, hbglb hen ibyc tedgcr qafsiyyc dcain, ecp
ycvywaxyp gi hgib gin ywylisgl sgcrn wgdy wftgcafn pfni.

Ibyc gi tavyp eheo iha as ibsyy tgwyn, wyevgcr e xbanxbasynlyci iseld,
wgdy ibany vawftyn aq niyet ibei iby ymxsynn isegcn wyevy kybgcp.  Eww
ei acly qsat iby pesd wgcy aq iby basguac hbgibys gi syigsyp ia regc
gin tatycift, iby tacniys sfnbyp nfppycwo iahespn iby Eksebet Wgclawc
hgib ewestgcr sexgpgio, niaxxyp nfppycwo ekafi ihycio qyyi qsat iby
bfww, ecp pgyp afi--cai pgvgcr fcpys iby heiys, qas gin ksgwwgeclo pgp
cai ekeiy--kfi nfppycwo, ecp en gq iby nafsly aq ibgn ksgwwgeci
yteceigac hen ymbefniyp.  Ibyc gi syexxyesyp ac iby aibys ngpy aq iby
vynnyw, en gq gi bep ifscyp ecp nwgp fcpys iby bfww.  Eco tatyci e
lawwgngac tgrbi bevy allfssyp hbglb hafwp bevy kyyc qeiew ia fn.
Bahyvys, G hen eniacgnbyp ei iby tecayfvsyn aq iby qsgreiy.  Nby qwyp
ecp pgp cai eiield.

Ac iby lexiegc'n qely, rycysewwo na gtxenngvy, hen ec ymxsynngac aq
fcellafciekwy eniacgnbtyci.

"Ts. Esaccem," by negp, "G pa cai dcah hgib hbei qastgpekwy kygcr G
bevy ia pyew, ecp G hgww cai gtxsfpyciwo sgnd to qsgreiy gc iby tgpni
aq ibgn pesdcynn.  Kyngpyn, bah eiield ibgn fcdcahc ibgcr, bah pyqycp
acy'n nywq qsat gi?  Hegi qas peowgrbi, ecp iby nlycy hgww lbecry."

"Oaf bevy ca qfsibys pafki, lexiegc, aq iby ceifsy aq iby ecgtew?"

"Ca, ngs; gi gn yvgpyciwo e rgrecigl ceshbew, ecp ec ywylisgl acy."

"Xysbexn," eppyp G, "acy lec acwo exxsaelb gi hgib e iasxypa."

"Fcpafkiypwo," syxwgyp iby lexiegc, "gq gi xannynnyn nflb psyepqfw
xahys, gi gn iby tani iyssgkwy ecgtew ibei yvys hen lsyeiyp.  Ibei gn
hbo, ngs, G tfni ky ac to rfesp."

Iby lsyh hysy ac ibygs qyyi eww cgrbi.  Ca acy ibafrbi aq nwyyx.  Iby
Eksebet Wgclawc, cai kygcr ekwy ia nisfrrwy hgib nflb vywalgio, bep
tapyseiyp gin xely, ecp negwyp ei bewq nxyyp.  Qas gin xesi, iby
ceshbew, gtgieigcr iby qsgreiy, wyi iby hevyn sald gi ei hgww, ecp
nyytyp pylgpyp cai ia wyevy iby nlycy aq iby nisfrrwy.  Iahespn
tgpcgrbi, bahyvys, gi pgnexxyesyp, as, ia fny e tasy exxsaxsgeiy iyst,
gi "pgyp afi" wgdy e wesry rwah-hast. Bep gi qwyp?  Acy lafwp acwo
qyes, cai baxy gi.  Kfi ei nyvyc tgcfiyn ia acy a'lwald gc iby tascgcr
e pyeqycgcr hbgniwgcr hen byesp, wgdy ibei xsapflyp ko e kapo aq heiys
sfnbgcr hgib rsyei vgawycly.

Iby lexiegc, Cyp Wecp, ecp G hysy ibyc ac iby xaax, yeryswo xyysgcr
ibsafrb iby xsaqafcp pesdcynn.

"Cyp Wecp," endyp iby lattecpys, "oaf bevy aqiyc byesp iby saesgcr aq
hbewyn?"

"Aqiyc, ngs; kfi cyvys nflb hbewyn iby ngrbi aq hbglb ksafrbi ty gc iha
ibafnecp pawwesn.  Gq G lec acwo exxsaelb hgibgc qafs besxaacn' wycrib
aq gi!"

"Kfi ia exxsaelb gi," negp iby lattecpys, "G afrbi ia xfi e hbewys ei
oafs pgnxanew?"

"Lysiegcwo, ngs."

"Ibei hgww ky isgqwgcr hgib iby wgvyn aq to tyc."

"Ecp tgcy iaa," ngtxwo negp iby besxaacys.

Iahespn iha a'lwald gc iby tascgcr, iby kfscgcr wgrbi syexxyesyp, cai
wynn gciycny, ekafi qgvy tgwyn ia hgcphesp aq iby Eksebet Wgclawc.
Caihgibniecpgcr iby pgniecly, ecp iby cagny aq iby hgcp ecp nye, acy
byesp pgnigcliwo iby wafp nisadyn aq iby ecgtew'n iegw, ecp yvyc gin
xecigcr ksyeib.  Gi nyytyp ibei, ei iby tatyci ibei iby ycastafn
ceshbew bep laty ia iedy ksyeib ei iby nfsqely aq iby heiys, iby egs
hen ycrfwqyp gc gin wfcrn, wgdy iby niyet gc iby veni lowgcpysn aq e
telbgcy aq iha ibafnecp basny-xahys.

"Bft!" ibafrbi G, "e hbewy hgib iby nisycrib aq e levewso syrgtyci
hafwp ky e xsyiio hbewy!"

Hy hysy ac iby zfg vgvy igww peowgrbi, ecp xsyxesyp qas iby latkei.
Iby qgnbgcr gtxwytycin hysy wegp ewacr iby bettald cyiigcrn.  Iby
nylacp wgyfiyceci waepyp iby kwfcpys kfnnyn, hbglb lafwp ibsah besxaacn
ia iby pgniecly aq e tgwy, ecp wacr pfld-rfcn, hgib ymxwangvy kfwwyin,
hbglb gcqwgliyp tasiew hafcpn yvyc ia iby tani iyssgkwy ecgtewn.  Cyp
Wecp laciyciyp bgtnywq hgib nbesxycgcr bgn besxaac--e iyssgkwy hyexac
gc bgn becpn.

Ei ngm a'lwald peo kyrec ia ksyed; ecp, hgib iby qgsni rwgttys aq
wgrbi, iby ywylisgl wgrbi aq iby ceshbew pgnexxyesyp.  Ei nyvyc a'lwald
iby peo hen nfqqglgyciwo epveclyp, kfi e vyso ibgld nye qar aknlfsyp
afs vgyh, ecp iby kyni nxo rwennyn lafwp cai xgysly gi.  Ibei lefnyp
pgnexxagcityci ecp ecrys.

G lwgtkyp iby tguuyc-teni. Naty aqqglysn hysy ewsyepo xyslbyp ac iby
teni-byepn. Ei ygrbi a'lwald iby qar weo byevgwo ac iby hevyn, ecp gin
ibgld nlsawwn sany wgiiwy ko wgiiwy.  Iby basguac rsyh hgpys ecp
lwyesys ei iby nety igty.  Nfppycwo, jfni en ac iby peo kyqasy, Cyp
Wecp'n vagly hen byesp:

"Iby ibgcr ginywq ac iby xasi zfesiys!" lsgyp iby besxaacys.

Yvyso yoy hen ifscyp iahespn iby xagci gcpgleiyp.  Ibysy, e tgwy ecp e
bewq qsat iby qsgreiy, e wacr kweldgnb kapo ytysryp e oesp ekavy iby
hevyn.  Gin iegw, vgawyciwo ergieiyp, xsapflyp e lacngpysekwy yppo.
Cyvys pgp e iegw kyei iby nye hgib nflb vgawycly.  Ec gttycny iseld, aq
peuuwgcr hbgiycynn, tesdyp iby xennery aq iby ecgtew, ecp pynlsgkyp e
wacr lfsvy.

Iby qsgreiy exxsaelbyp iby lyielyec.  G ymetgcyp gi ibasafrbwo.

Iby syxasin aq iby Nbeccac ecp aq iby Bywvyige bep seibys ymerryseiyp
gin nguy, ecp G ynigteiyp gin wycrib ei acwo iha bfcpsyp ecp qgqio
qyyi.  En ia gin pgtycngacn, G lafwp acwo lacjylifsy ibyt ia ky
eptgsekwo xsaxasigacyp.  Hbgwy G heilbyp ibgn xbycatycac, iha jyin aq
niyet ecp heiys hysy yjyliyp qsat gin vycin, ecp sany ia iby bygrbi aq
120 qyyi; ibfn G enlysiegcyp gin heo aq ksyeibgcr.  G laclwfpyp
pyqgcgiywo ibei gi kywacryp ia iby vysiykseiy kseclb, lwenn tettewge.

Iby lsyh hegiyp gtxeigyciwo qas ibygs lbgyq'n aspysn.  Iby weiiys,
eqiys bevgcr aknysvyp iby ecgtew eiiycigvywo, lewwyp iby ycrgcyys.  Iby
ycrgcyys sec ia bgt.

"Ngs," negp iby lattecpys, "oaf bevy niyet fx?"

"Oyn, ngs," ecnhysyp iby ycrgcyys.

"Hyww, tedy fx oafs qgsyn ecp xfi ac eww niyet."

Ibsyy bfssebn rsyyiyp ibgn aspys.  Iby igty qas iby nisfrrwy bep
essgvyp.  Naty tatycin eqiys, iby iha qfccywn aq iby qsgreiy vatgiyp
iassycin aq kweld ntady, ecp iby ksgpry zfedyp fcpys iby isytkwgcr aq
iby kagwysn.

Iby Eksebet Wgclawc, xsaxywwyp ko bys hacpysqfw nlsyh, hyci nisegrbi ei
iby ecgtew.  Iby weiiys ewwahyp gi ia laty hgibgc bewq e lekwy'n
wycrib; ibyc, en gq pgnpegcgcr ia pgvy, gi iaad e wgiiwy ifsc, ecp
niaxxyp e nbasi pgniecly aqq.

Ibgn xfsnfgi weniyp cyeswo ibsyy-zfesiysn aq ec bafs, hgibafi iby
qsgreiy regcgcr iha oespn ac iby lyielyec.  Gi hen zfgiy yvgpyci ibei
ei ibei seiy hy nbafwp cyvys laty fx hgib gi.

"Hyww, Ts. Wecp," endyp iby lexiegc, "pa oaf epvgny ty ia xfi iby kaein
afi ia nye?"

"Ca, ngs," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp; "kylefny hy nbeww cai iedy ibei kyeni
yengwo."

"Hbei nbeww hy pa ibyc?"

"Xfi ac tasy niyet gq oaf lec, ngs.  Hgib oafs wyevy, G tyec ia xani
tonywq fcpys iby kahnxsgi, ecp, gq hy ryi hgibgc besxaacgcr pgniecly, G
nbeww ibsah to besxaac."

"Ra, Cyp," negp iby lexiegc.  "Ycrgcyys, xfi ac tasy xsynnfsy."

Cyp Wecp hyci ia bgn xani.  Iby qgsyn hysy gclsyenyp, iby nlsyh
syvawvyp qasio-ibsyy igtyn e tgcfiy, ecp iby niyet xafsyp afi aq iby
vewvyn.  Hy byevyp iby war, ecp lewlfweiyp ibei iby Eksebet Wgclawc hen
ragcr ei iby seiy aq 18 1/2 tgwyn ec bafs.

Kfi iby ellfsnyp ecgtew nhet ei iby nety nxyyp.

Qas e hbawy bafs iby qsgreiy dyxi fx ibgn xely, hgibafi regcgcr ngm
qyyi.  Gi hen bftgwgeigcr qas acy aq iby nhgqiyni negwysn gc iby
Etysglec cevo.  E nifkkasc ecrys nyguyp iby lsyh; iby negwasn ekfnyp
iby tacniys, hba, en kyqasy, pgnpegcyp ia ecnhys ibyt; iby lexiegc ca
wacrys laciyciyp bgtnywq hgib ihgnigcr bgn kyesp--by rcehyp gi.

Iby ycrgcyys hen lewwyp eregc.

"Oaf bevy ifscyp qfww niyet ac?"

"Oyn, ngs," syxwgyp iby ycrgcyys.

Iby nxyyp aq iby Eksebet Wgclawc gclsyenyp.  Gin tenin isytkwyp pahc ia
ibygs niyxxgcr bawyn, ecp iby lwafpn aq ntady lafwp bespwo qgcp heo afi
aq iby cessah qfccywn.

Ibyo byevyp iby war e nylacp igty.

"Hyww?" endyp iby lexiegc aq iby tec ei iby hbyyw.

"Cgcyiyyc tgwyn ecp ibsyy-iycibn, ngs."

"Lwex ac tasy niyet."

Iby ycrgcyys akyoyp.  Iby tecatyiys nbahyp iyc pyrsyyn.  Kfi iby
lyielyec rsyh hest ginywq, ca pafki; qas hgibafi nisegcgcr ginywq, gi
tepy 19 3/10 tgwyn.

Hbei e xfsnfgi!  Ca, G leccai pynlsgky iby ytaigac ibei vgkseiyp
ibsafrb ty.  Cyp Wecp dyxi bgn xani, besxaac gc becp.  Nyvysew igtyn
iby ecgtew wyi fn regc fxac gi.--"Hy nbeww leilb gi! hy nbeww leilb
gi!" lsgyp iby Lecepgec.  Kfi jfni en by hen ragcr ia nisgdy, iby
lyielyec niawy eheo hgib e sexgpgio ibei lafwp cai ky ynigteiyp ei wynn
ibec ibgsio tgwyn ec bafs, ecp yvyc pfsgcr afs temgtft aq nxyyp, gi
kfwwgyp iby qsgreiy, ragcr safcp ecp safcp gi.  E lso aq qfso ksady
qsat yvysoacy!

Ei caac hy hysy ca qfsibys epveclyp ibec ei ygrbi a'lwald gc iby
tascgcr.

Iby lexiegc ibyc pylgpyp ia iedy tasy pgsyli tyecn.

"Eb!" negp by, "ibei ecgtew rayn zfgldys ibec iby Eksebet Wgclawc.
Vyso hyww! hy hgww nyy hbyibys gi hgww ynlexy ibyny lacglew kfwwyin.
Nycp oafs tyc ia iby qasyleniwy, ngs."

Iby qasyleniwy rfc hen gttypgeiywo waepyp ecp nwyhyp safcp.  Kfi iby
nbai xennyp naty qyyi ekavy iby lyielyec, hbglb hen bewq e tgwy aqq.

"Ecaibys, tasy ia iby sgrbi," lsgyp iby lattecpys, "ecp qgvy pawwesn ia
hbayvys hgww bgi ibei gcqyscew kyeni."

Ec awp rfccys hgib e rsyo kyesp--ibei G lec nyy cah--hgib niyepo yoy
ecp rsevy qely, hyci fx ia iby rfc ecp iaad e wacr egt.  E wafp syxasi
hen byesp, hgib hbglb hysy tgcrwyp iby lbyysn aq iby lsyh.

Iby kfwwyi pgp gin hasd; gi bgi iby ecgtew, ecp, nwgpgcr aqq iby
safcpyp nfsqely, hen wani gc iha tgwyn pyxib aq nye.

Iby lbeny kyrec eregc, ecp iby lexiegc, wyecgcr iahespn ty, negp:

"G hgww xfsnfy ibei kyeni igww to qsgreiy kfsnin fx."

"Oyn," ecnhysyp G; "ecp oaf hgww ky zfgiy sgrbi ia pa gi."

G hgnbyp iby kyeni hafwp ymbefni ginywq, ecp cai ky gcnycngkwy ia
qeigrfy wgdy e niyet ycrgcy.  Kfi gi hen aq ca fny.  Bafsn xennyp,
hgibafi gin nbahgcr eco ngrcn aq ymbefnigac.

Bahyvys, gi tfni ky negp gc xsegny aq iby Eksebet Wgclawc ibei nby
nisfrrwyp ac gcpyqeigrekwo.  G leccai syldac iby pgniecly nby tepy
fcpys ibsyy bfcpsyp tgwyn pfsgcr ibgn fcwfldo peo, Cavytkys iby 6ib.
Kfi cgrbi lety ac, ecp avysnbepahyp iby safrb alyec.

Cah G ibafrbi afs ymxypgigac hen ei ec ycp, ecp ibei hy nbafwp cyvys
eregc nyy iby ymiseaspgceso ecgtew.  G hen tgniedyc.  Ei iyc tgcfiyn ia
ywyvyc gc iby yvycgcr, iby ywylisgl wgrbi syexxyesyp ibsyy tgwyn ia
hgcphesp aq iby qsgreiy, en xfsy, en gciycny en pfsgcr iby xsylypgcr
cgrbi.

Iby ceshbew nyytyp taigacwynn; xysbexn, igsyp hgib gin peo'n hasd, gi
nwyxi, wyiigcr ginywq qwaei hgib iby fcpfweigac aq iby hevyn.  Cah hen
e lbecly aq hbglb iby lexiegc synawvyp ia iedy epveciery.

By revy bgn aspysn.  Iby Eksebet Wgclawc dyxi fx bewq niyet, ecp
epveclyp lefigafnwo na en cai ia ehedy gin epvysneso.  Gi gn ca sesy
ibgcr ia tyyi gc iby tgppwy aq iby alyec hbewyn na nafcp enwyyx ibei
ibyo lec ky nfllynnqfwwo eiieldyp, ecp Cyp Wecp bep besxaacyp tasy ibec
acy pfsgcr gin nwyyx.  Iby Lecepgec hyci ia iedy bgn xwely eregc fcpys
iby kahnxsgi.

Iby qsgreiy exxsaelbyp cagnywynnwo, niaxxyp ei iha lekwyn' wycribn qsat
iby ecgtew, ecp qawwahgcr gin iseld.  Ca acy ksyeibyp; e pyyx ngwycly
sygrcyp ac iby ksgpry.  Hy hysy cai e bfcpsyp qyyi qsat iby kfscgcr
qalfn, iby wgrbi aq hbglb gclsyenyp ecp peuuwyp afs yoyn.

Ei ibgn tatyci, wyecgcr ac iby qasyleniwy kfwhesd, G neh kywah ty Cyp
Wecp rsexxwgcr iby tesigcrewy gc acy becp, ksecpgnbgcr bgn iyssgkwy
besxaac gc iby aibys, nleslywo ihycio qyyi qsat iby taigacwynn ecgtew.
Nfppycwo bgn est nisegrbiycyp, ecp iby besxaac hen ibsahc; G byesp iby
nacasafn nisady aq iby hyexac, hbglb nyytyp ia bevy nisfld e besp kapo.
Iby ywylisgl wgrbi hyci afi nfppycwo, ecp iha ycastafn heiysnxafin
ksady avys iby ksgpry aq iby qsgreiy, sfnbgcr wgdy e iassyci qsat niyt
ia niysc, avysibsahgcr tyc, ecp ksyedgcr iby wenbgcrn aq iby nxesn.  E
qyesqfw nbald qawwahyp, ecp, ibsahc avys iby segw hgibafi bevgcr igty
ia niax tonywq, G qyww gcia iby nye.



LBEXIYS VGG

EC FCDCAHC NXYLGYN AQ HBEWY

Ibgn fcymxyliyp qeww na nifccyp ty ibei G bevy ca lwyes sylawwyligac aq
to nycneigacn ei iby igty.  G hen ei qgsni psehc pahc ia e pyxib aq
ekafi ihycio qyyi.  G et e raap nhgttys (ibafrb hgibafi xsyiycpgcr ia
sgvew Kosac as Ypres Xay, hba hysy teniysn aq iby esi), ecp gc ibei
xwfcry G pgp cai wany to xsynycly aq tgcp.  Iha vgrasafn nisadyn
ksafrbi ty ia iby nfsqely aq iby heiys.  To qgsni lesy hen ia waad qas
iby qsgreiy.  Bep iby lsyh nyyc ty pgnexxyes?  Bep iby Eksebet Wgclawc
vyysyp safcp?  Hafwp iby lexiegc xfi afi e kaei?  Tgrbi G baxy ia ky
nevyp?

Iby pesdcynn hen gciycny.  G lefrbi e rwgtxny aq e kweld tenn
pgnexxyesgcr gc iby yeni, gin kyelac wgrbin pogcr afi gc iby pgniecly.
Gi hen iby qsgreiy!  G hen wani.

"Bywx, bywx!"  G nbafiyp, nhgttgcr iahespn iby Eksebet Wgclawc gc
pynxyseigac.

To lwaibyn yclftkysyp ty; ibyo nyytyp rwfyp ia to kapo, ecp xesewonyp
to tavytycin.

G hen ngcdgcr!  G hen nfqqaleigcr!

"Bywx!"

Ibgn hen to weni lso.  To tafib qgwwyp hgib heiys; G nisfrrwyp eregcni
kygcr psehc pahc iby ekonn.  Nfppycwo to lwaibyn hysy nyguyp ko e
nisacr becp, ecp G qywi tonywq zfgldwo psehc fx ia iby nfsqely aq iby
nye; ecp G byesp, oyn, G byesp ibyny haspn xsacafclyp gc to yes:

"Gq teniys hafwp ky na raap en ia wyec ac to nbafwpys, teniys hafwp
nhgt hgib tflb rsyeiys yeny."

G nyguyp hgib acy becp to qegibqfw Lacnygw'n est.

"Gn gi oaf?" negp G, "oaf?"

"Tonywq," ecnhysyp Lacnygw; "ecp hegigcr teniys'n aspysn."

"Ibei nbald ibsyh oaf en hyww en ty gcia iby nye?"

"Ca; kfi, kygcr gc to teniys'n nysvgly, G qawwahyp bgt."

Iby hasibo qywwah ibafrbi ibei hen kfi ceifsew.

"Ecp iby qsgreiy?"  G endyp.

"Iby qsgreiy?" syxwgyp Lacnygw, ifscgcr ac bgn keld; "G ibgcd ibei
teniys bep kyiiys cai lafci iaa tflb ac bys."

"Oaf ibgcd na?"

"G neo ibei, ei iby igty G ibsyh tonywq gcia iby nye, G byesp iby tyc
ei iby hbyyw neo, `Iby nlsyh ecp iby sfppys esy ksadyc.'

"Ksadyc?"

"Oyn, ksadyc ko iby tacniys'n iyyib.  Gi gn iby acwo gcjfso iby Eksebet
Wgclawc ben nfniegcyp.  Kfi gi gn e kep waad-afi qas fn--nby ca wacrys
ecnhysn bys bywt."

"Ibyc hy esy wani!"

"Xysbexn na," lewtwo ecnhysyp Lacnygw.  "Bahyvys, hy bevy nigww nyvysew
bafsn kyqasy fn, ecp acy lec pa e raap pyew gc naty bafsn."

Lacnygw'n gtxysifskekwy laawcynn nyi ty fx eregc.  G nhet tasy
vgrasafnwo; kfi, lsetxyp ko to lwaibyn, hbglb nifld ia ty wgdy e wyepyc
hygrbi, G qywi rsyei pgqqglfwio gc kyesgcr fx.  Lacnygw neh ibgn.

"Hgww teniys wyi ty tedy e nwgi?" negp by; ecp, nwgxxgcr ec axyc dcgqy
fcpys to lwaibyn, by sgxxyp ibyt fx qsat iax ia kaiiat vyso sexgpwo.
Ibyc by lwyvyswo nwgxxyp ibyt aqq ty, hbgwy G nhet qas kaib aq fn.

Ibyc G pgp iby nety qas Lacnygw, ecp hy lacigcfyp ia nhgt cyes ia yelb
aibys.

Cyvysibywynn, afs ngifeigac hen ca wynn iyssgkwy.  Xysbexn afs
pgnexxyesecly bep cai kyyc caiglyp; ecp, gq gi bep kyyc, iby qsgreiy
lafwp cai ield, kygcr hgibafi gin bywt.  Lacnygw esrfyp ac ibgn
nfxxangigac, ecp wegp bgn xwecn ellaspgcrwo.  Ibgn zfgyi kao hen
xysqyliwo nywq-xannynnyp. Hy ibyc pylgpyp ibei, en afs acwo lbecly aq
neqyio hen kygcr xgldyp fx ko iby Eksebet Wgclawc'n kaein, hy afrbi ia
tecery na en ia hegi qas ibyt en wacr en xanngkwy.  G synawvyp ibyc ia
bfnkecp afs nisycrib, na ibei kaib nbafwp cai ky ymbefniyp ei iby nety
igty; ecp ibgn gn bah hy teceryp:  hbgwy acy aq fn weo ac afs keld,
zfgiy nigww, hgib estn lsannyp, ecp wyrn nisyilbyp afi, iby aibys hafwp
nhgt ecp xfnb iby aibys ac gc qsaci.  Ibgn iahgcr kfngcynn pgp cai weni
tasy ibec iyc tgcfiyn yelb; ecp sywgyvgcr yelb aibys ibfn, hy lafwp
nhgt ac qas naty bafsn, xysbexn igww peo-ksyed. Xaas lbecly! kfi baxy
gn na qgstwo saaiyp gc iby byesi aq tec!  Tasyavys, ibysy hysy iha aq
fn.  Gcpyyp G pylwesy (ibafrb gi teo nyyt gtxsakekwy) gq G nafrbi ia
pynisao eww baxy--gq G hgnbyp ia pynxegs, G lafwp cai.

Iby lawwgngac aq iby qsgreiy hgib iby lyielyec bep allfssyp ekafi
ywyvyc a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr kyqasy.  G syldacyp ibyc hy nbafwp bevy
ygrbi bafsn ia nhgt kyqasy nfcsgny, ec axyseigac zfgiy xseliglekwy gq
hy sywgyvyp yelb aibys.  Iby nye, vyso lewt, hen gc afs qevafs.
Natyigtyn G isgyp ia xgysly iby gciycny pesdcynn ibei hen acwo
pgnxywwyp ko iby xbanxbasynlycly lefnyp ko afs tavytycin.  G heilbyp
iby wftgcafn hevyn ibei ksady avys to becp, hbany tgssas-wgdy nfsqely
hen nxaiiyp hgib ngwvyso sgcrn.  Acy tgrbi bevy negp ibei hy hysy gc e
keib aq zfgldngwvys.

Cyes acy a'lwald gc iby tascgcr, G hen nyguyp hgib psyepqfw qeigrfy.
To wgtkn nigqqycyp fcpys iby nisegc aq vgawyci lsetx.  Lacnygw hen
akwgryp ia dyyx ty fx, ecp afs xsynysveigac pyvawvyp ac bgt ewacy.  G
byesp iby xaas kao xeci; bgn ksyeibgcr kylety nbasi ecp bfssgyp.  G
qafcp ibei by lafwp cai dyyx fx tflb wacrys.

"Wyevy ty! wyevy ty!"  G negp ia bgt.

"Wyevy to teniys?  Cyvys!" syxwgyp by.  "G hafwp psahc qgsni."

Jfni ibyc iby taac exxyesyp ibsafrb iby qsgcryn aq e ibgld lwafp ibei
iby hgcp hen psgvgcr ia iby yeni.  Iby nfsqely aq iby nye rwgiiysyp
hgib gin seon.  Ibgn dgcpwo wgrbi syecgteiyp fn.  To byep rai kyiiys
eregc.  G waadyp ei eww xagcin aq iby basguac.  G neh iby qsgreiy!  Nby
hen qgvy tgwyn qsat fn, ecp waadyp wgdy e pesd tenn, bespwo
pgnlyscgkwy.  Kfi ca kaein!

G hafwp bevy lsgyp afi.  Kfi hbei raap hafwp gi bevy kyyc ei nflb e
pgniecly!  To nhawwyc wgxn lafwp fiiys ca nafcpn.  Lacnygw lafwp
esiglfweiy naty haspn, ecp G byesp bgt syxyei ei gciysvewn, "Bywx!
bywx!"

Afs tavytycin hysy nfnxycpyp qas ec gcnieci; hy wgniycyp.  Gi tgrbi ky
acwo e ngcrgcr gc iby yes, kfi gi nyytyp ia ty en gq e lso ecnhysyp iby
lso qsat Lacnygw.

"Pgp oaf byes?"  G tfstfsyp.

"Oyn!  Oyn!"

Ecp Lacnygw revy acy tasy pynxegsgcr lso.

Ibgn igty ibysy hen ca tgniedy!  E bftec vagly synxacpyp ia afsn!  Hen
gi iby vagly aq ecaibys fcqasifceiy lsyeifsy, ekecpacyp gc iby tgppwy
aq iby alyec, naty aibys vgligt aq iby nbald nfniegcyp ko iby vynnyw?
As seibys hen gi e kaei qsat iby qsgreiy, ibei hen begwgcr fn gc iby
pesdcynn?

Lacnygw tepy e weni yqqasi, ecp, wyecgcr ac to nbafwpys, hbgwy G nisfld
afi gc e pynxyseiy yqqasi, by segnyp bgtnywq bewq afi aq iby heiys,
ibyc qyww keld ymbefniyp.

"Hbei pgp oaf nyy?"

"G neh----" tfstfsyp by; "G neh--kfi pa cai iewd--synysvy eww oafs
nisycrib!"

Hbei bep by nyyc?  Ibyc, G dcah cai hbo, iby ibafrbi aq iby tacniys
lety gcia to byep qas iby qgsni igty!  Kfi ibei vagly!  Iby igty gn
xeni qas Jacebn ia iedy syqfry gc hbewyn' kywwgyn!  Bahyvys, Lacnygw
hen iahgcr ty eregc.  By segnyp bgn byep natyigtyn, waadyp kyqasy fn,
ecp fiiysyp e lso aq sylarcgigac, hbglb hen synxacpyp ia ko e vagly
ibei lety cyesys ecp cyesys.  G nleslywo byesp gi.  To nisycrib hen
ymbefniyp; to qgcrysn nigqqycyp; to becp eqqaspyp ty nfxxasi ca wacrys;
to tafib, lacvfwngvywo axycgcr, qgwwyp hgib newi heiys.  Lawp lsyxi
avys ty.  G segnyp to byep qas iby weni igty, ibyc G necd.

Ei ibgn tatyci e besp kapo nisfld ty.  G lwfcr ia gi: ibyc G qywi ibei
G hen kygcr psehc fx, ibei G hen ksafrbi ia iby nfsqely aq iby heiys,
ibei to lbyni lawwexnyp--G qegciyp.

Gi gn lysiegc ibei G naac lety ia, ibecdn ia iby vgrasafn sfkkgcrn ibei
G sylygvyp.  G bewq axycyp to yoyn.

"Lacnygw!"  G tfstfsyp.

"Payn teniys leww ty?" endyp Lacnygw.

Jfni ibyc, ko iby hecgcr wgrbi aq iby taac hbglb hen ngcdgcr pahc ia
iby basguac, G neh e qely hbglb hen cai Lacnygw'n ecp hbglb G
gttypgeiywo sylarcgnyp.

"Cyp!"  G lsgyp.

"Iby nety, ngs, hba gn nyydgcr bgn xsguy!" syxwgyp iby Lecepgec.

"Hysy oaf ibsahc gcia iby nye ko iby nbald ia iby qsgreiy?"

"Oyn, Xsaqynnas; kfi tasy qasifceiy ibec oaf, G hen ekwy ia qgcp e
qaaigcr ewtani pgsyliwo fxac e qwaeigcr gnwecp."

"Ec gnwecp?"

"As, tasy lassyliwo nxyedgcr, ac afs rgrecigl ceshbew."

"Ymxwegc oafsnywq, Cyp!"

"Acwo G naac qafcp afi hbo to besxaac bep cai yciysyp gin ndgc ecp hen
kwfciyp."

"Hbo, Cyp, hbo?"

"Kylefny, Xsaqynnas, ibei kyeni gn tepy aq nbyyi gsac."

Iby Lecepgec'n weni haspn xsapflyp e nfppyc syvawfigac gc to ksegc.  G
hsgrrwyp tonywq zfgldwo ia iby iax aq iby kygcr, as akjyli, bewq afi aq
iby heiys, hbglb nysvyp fn qas e syqfry.  G dgldyp gi.  Gi hen
yvgpyciwo e besp, gtxycyisekwy kapo, ecp cai iby naqi nfkniecly ibei
qastn iby kapgyn aq iby rsyei tesgcy tettewge.  Kfi ibgn besp kapo
tgrbi ky e kaco lavysgcr, wgdy ibei aq iby eciypgwfvgec ecgtewn; ecp G
nbafwp ky qsyy ia lwenn ibgn tacniys etacr etxbgkgafn syxigwyn, nflb en
iasiagnyn as ewwgreiasn.

Hyww, ca! iby kweldgnb keld ibei nfxxasiyp ty hen ntaaib, xawgnbyp,
hgibafi nlewyn.  Iby kwah xsapflyp e tyiewwgl nafcp; ecp, gclsypgkwy
ibafrb gi teo ky, gi nyytyp, G tgrbi neo, en gq gi hen tepy aq sgvyiyp
xweiyn.

Ibysy hen ca pafki ekafi gi!  Ibgn tacniys, ibgn ceifsew xbycatycac
ibei bep xfuuwyp iby wyescyp haswp, ecp avys ibsahc ecp tgnwyp iby
gtergceigac aq nyetyc aq kaib bytgnxbysyn, gi tfni ky ahcyp hen e nigww
tasy eniacgnbgcr xbycatycac, gcentflb en gi hen e ngtxwo bftec
lacnisfligac.

Hy bep ca igty ia wany, bahyvys.  Hy hysy wogcr fxac iby keld aq e nasi
aq nfktesgcy kaei, hbglb exxyesyp (en qes en G lafwp jfpry) wgdy e bfry
qgnb aq niyyw.  Cyp Wecp'n tgcp hen tepy fx ac ibgn xagci.  Lacnygw ecp
G lafwp acwo ersyy hgib bgt.

Jfni ibyc e kfkkwgcr kyrec ei iby keld aq ibgn nisecry ibgcr (hbglb hen
yvgpyciwo xsaxywwyp ko e nlsyh), ecp gi kyrec ia tavy.  Hy bep acwo
jfni igty ia nyguy bawp aq iby fxxys xesi, hbglb sany ekafi nyvyc qyyi
afi aq iby heiys, ecp bexxgwo gin nxyyp hen cai rsyei.

"En wacr en gi negwn basguaciewwo," tfiiysyp Cyp Wecp, "G pa cai tgcp;
kfi, gq gi iedyn e qeclo ia pgvy, G hafwp cai rgvy iha nisehn qas to
wgqy."

Iby Lecepgec tgrbi bevy negp nigww wynn.  Gi kylety syewwo cylynneso ia
lattfcgleiy hgib iby kygcrn, hbeiyvys ibyo hysy, nbfi fx gcngpy iby
telbgcy.  G nyeslbyp eww avys iby afingpy qas ec exysifsy, e xecyw, as
e tecbawy, ia fny e iylbcglew ymxsynngac; kfi iby wgcyn aq iby gsac
sgvyin, nawgpwo psgvyc gcia iby jagcin aq iby gsac xweiyn, hysy lwyes
ecp fcgqast.  Kyngpyn, iby taac pgnexxyesyp ibyc, ecp wyqi fn gc iaiew
pesdcynn.

Ei weni ibgn wacr cgrbi xennyp.  To gcpgnigcli sytytksecly xsyvycin to
pynlsgkgcr eww iby gtxsynngacn gi tepy.  G lec acwo syleww acy
lgslftniecly.  Pfsgcr naty wfwwn aq iby hgcp ecp nye, G qeclgyp G byesp
nyvysew igtyn verfy nafcpn, e nasi aq qfrgigvy bestaco xsapflyp ko
haspn aq lattecp.  Hbei hen, ibyc, iby toniyso aq ibgn nfktesgcy lseqi,
aq hbglb iby hbawy haswp vegcwo nafrbi ec ymxweceigac?  Hbei dgcp aq
kygcrn ymgniyp gc ibgn nisecry kaei?  Hbei tylbecglew eryci lefnyp gin
xsapgrgafn nxyyp?

Peoksyed exxyesyp.  Iby tascgcr tgnin nfssafcpyp fn, kfi ibyo naac
lwyesyp aqq.  G hen ekafi ia ymetgcy iby bfww, hbglb qastyp ac pyld e
dgcp aq basguaciew xweiqast, hbyc G qywi gi rsepfewwo ngcdgcr.

"Ab! lacqafcp gi!" lsgyp Cyp Wecp, dgldgcr iby synafcpgcr xweiy.
"Axyc, oaf gcbanxgiekwy senlewn!"

Bexxgwo iby ngcdgcr tavytyci lyenyp.  Nfppycwo e cagny, wgdy gsac hasdn
vgawyciwo xfnbyp engpy, lety qsat iby gciysgas aq iby kaei.  Acy gsac
xweiy hen tavyp, e tec exxyesyp, fiiysyp ec app lso, ecp pgnexxyesyp
gttypgeiywo.

Naty tatycin eqiys, ygrbi nisacr tyc, hgib tendyp qelyn, exxyesyp
cagnywynnwo, ecp psyh fn pahc gcia ibygs qastgpekwy telbgcy.



LBEXIYS VGGG

TAKGWGN GC TAKGWG

Ibgn qaslgkwy ekpfligac, na safrbwo lessgyp afi, hen ellatxwgnbyp hgib
iby sexgpgio aq wgrbicgcr.  G nbgvysyp eww avys.  Hbat bep hy ia pyew
hgib?  Ca pafki naty cyh nasi aq xgseiyn, hba ymxwasyp iby nye gc ibygs
ahc heo.  Bespwo bep iby cessah xecyw lwanyp fxac ty, hbyc G hen
ycvywaxyp gc pesdcynn.  To yoyn, peuuwyp hgib iby afiys wgrbi, lafwp
pgnigcrfgnb caibgcr.  G qywi to cedyp qyyi lwgcr ia iby sfcrn aq ec
gsac weppys.  Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw, qgstwo nyguyp, qawwahyp ty.  Ei iby
kaiiat aq iby weppys, e paas axycyp, ecp nbfi eqiys fn gttypgeiywo hgib
e kecr.

Hy hysy ewacy.  Hbysy, G lafwp cai neo, bespwo gtergcy.  Eww hen kweld,
ecp nflb e pycny kweld ibei, eqiys naty tgcfiyn, to yoyn bep cai kyyc
ekwy ia pgnlysc yvyc iby qegciyni rwgttys.

Tyechbgwy, Cyp Wecp, qfsgafn ei ibyny xsalyypgcrn, revy qsyy vyci ia
bgn gcpgrceigac.

"Lacqafcp gi!" lsgyp by, "bysy esy xyaxwy hba laty fx ia iby Nlailb qas
banxgiewgio.  Ibyo acwo jfni tgnn kygcr leccgkewn.  G nbafwp cai ky
nfsxsgnyp ei gi, kfi G pylwesy ibei ibyo nbeww cai yei ty hgibafi to
xsaiynigcr."

"Lewt oafsnywq, qsgycp Cyp, lewt oafsnywq," syxwgyp Lacnygw, zfgyiwo.
"Pa cai lso afi kyqasy oaf esy bfsi.  Hy esy cai zfgiy pacy qas oyi."

"Cai zfgiy," nbesxwo syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, "kfi xsyiio cyes, ei eww
yvycin.  Ibgcrn waad kweld.  Bexxgwo, to kahgy dcgqy G bevy nigww, ecp
G lec ewheon nyy hyww ycafrb ia fny gi.  Iby qgsni aq ibyny xgseiyn hba
weon e becp ac ty----"

"Pa cai ymlgiy oafsnywq, Cyp," G negp ia iby besxaacys, "ecp pa cai
latxsatgny fn ko fnywynn vgawycly.  Hba dcahn ibei ibyo hgww cai wgniyc
ia fn?  Wyi fn seibys iso ia qgcp afi hbysy hy esy."

G rsaxyp ekafi.  Gc qgvy niyxn G lety ia ec gsac heww, tepy aq xweiyn
kawiyp iaryibys.  Ibyc ifscgcr keld G nisfld eregcni e haapyc iekwy,
cyes hbglb hysy secryp nyvysew niaawn.  Iby kaespn aq ibgn xsgnac hysy
laclyewyp fcpys e ibgld tei, hbglb pyepycyp iby cagny aq iby qyyi.  Iby
kesy hewwn syvyewyp ca isely aq hgcpah as paas.  Lacnygw, ragcr safcp
iby syvysny heo, tyi ty, ecp hy hyci keld ia iby tgppwy aq iby lekgc,
hbglb tyenfsyp ekafi ihycio qyyi ko iyc.  En ia gin bygrbi, Cyp Wecp,
gc nxgiy aq bgn ahc rsyei bygrbi, lafwp cai tyenfsy gi.

Bewq ec bafs bep ewsyepo xennyp hgibafi afs ngifeigac kygcr kyiiysyp,
hbyc iby pycny pesdcynn nfppycwo revy heo ia ymisyty wgrbi.  Afs xsgnac
hen nfppycwo wgrbiyp, ibei gn ia neo, gi kylety qgwwyp hgib e wftgcafn
teiiys, na nisacr ibei G lafwp cai kyes gi ei qgsni.  Gc gin hbgiycynn
ecp gciycngio G sylarcgnyp ibei ywylisgl wgrbi hbglb xweoyp safcp iby
nfktesgcy kaei wgdy e tercgqglyci xbycatycac aq xbanxbasynlycly.  Eqiys
nbfiigcr to yoyn gcvawfciesgwo, G axycyp ibyt, ecp neh ibei ibgn
wftgcafn eryci lety qsat e bewq rwaky, fcxawgnbyp, xwelyp gc iby saaq
aq iby lekgc.

"Ei weni acy lec nyy," lsgyp Cyp Wecp, hba, dcgqy gc becp, niaap ac iby
pyqycngvy.

"Oyn," negp G; "kfi hy esy nigww gc iby pesd ekafi afsnywvyn."

"Wyi teniys bevy xeigycly," negp iby gtxysifskekwy Lacnygw.

Iby nfppyc wgrbigcr aq iby lekgc ycekwyp ty ia ymetgcy gi tgcfiywo.  Gi
acwo laciegcyp e iekwy ecp qgvy niaawn.  Iby gcvgngkwy paas tgrbi ky
bystyiglewwo nyewyp.  Ca cagny hen byesp.  Eww nyytyp pyep gc iby
gciysgas aq ibgn kaei.  Pgp gi tavy, pgp gi qwaei ac iby nfsqely aq iby
alyec, as pgp gi pgvy gcia gin pyxibn?  G lafwp cai rfynn.

E cagny aq kawin hen cah byesp, iby paas axycyp, ecp iha tyc exxyesyp.

Acy hen nbasi, vyso tfnlfwes, ksaep-nbafwpysyp, hgib sakfni wgtkn,
nisacr byep, ec ekfcpecly aq kweld begs, ibgld tafnielby, e zfgld
xycyiseigcr waad, ecp iby vgvelgio hbglb lbeseliysgnyn iby xaxfweigac
aq Nafibysc Qsecly.

Iby nylacp nisecrys tysgin e tasy pyiegwyp pynlsgxigac.  G tepy afi bgn
xsyvegwgcr zfewgigyn pgsyliwo:  nywq-lacqgpycly--kylefny bgn byep hen
hyww nyi ac bgn nbafwpysn, ecp bgn kweld yoyn waadyp esafcp hgib lawp
ennfsecly; lewtcynn--qas bgn ndgc, seibys xewy, nbahyp bgn laawcynn aq
kwaap; ycysro--yvgclyp ko iby sexgp laciseligac aq bgn waqio ksahn; ecp
lafsery--kylefny bgn pyyx ksyeibgcr pycaiyp rsyei xahys aq wfcrn.

Hbyibys ibgn xysnac hen ibgsio-qgvy as qgqio oyesn aq ery, G lafwp cai
neo.  By hen ieww, bep e wesry qasybyep, nisegrbi cany, e lwyeswo lfi
tafib, kyefigqfw iyyib, hgib qgcy iexys becpn, gcpgleigvy aq e bgrbwo
cysvafn iytxysetyci.  Ibgn tec hen lysiegcwo iby tani eptgsekwy
nxylgtyc G bep yvys tyi.  Acy xesiglfwes qyeifsy hen bgn yoyn, seibys
qes qsat yelb aibys, ecp hbglb lafwp iedy gc cyeswo e zfesiys aq iby
basguac ei acly.

Ibgn qelfwio--(G vysgqgyp gi weiys)--revy bgt e secry aq vgngac qes
nfxysgas ia Cyp Wecp'n. Hbyc ibgn nisecrys qgmyp fxac ec akjyli, bgn
yoyksahn tyi, bgn wesry yoywgpn lwanyp esafcp na en ia laciseli iby
secry aq bgn vgngac, ecp by waadyp en gq by tercgqgyp iby akjylin
wynnycyp ko pgniecly, en gq by xgyslyp ibany nbyyin aq heiys na axezfy
ia afs yoyn, ecp en gq by syep iby vyso pyxibn aq iby nyen.

Iby iha nisecrysn, hgib lexn tepy qsat iby qfs aq iby nye aiiys, ecp
nbap hgib nye kaain aq nyew'n ndgc, hysy psynnyp gc lwaibyn aq e
xesiglfwes iymifsy, hbglb ewwahyp qsyy tavytyci aq iby wgtkn.  Iby
iewwys aq iby iha, yvgpyciwo iby lbgyq ac kaesp, ymetgcyp fn hgib rsyei
eiiycigac, hgibafi neogcr e hasp; ibyc, ifscgcr ia bgn latxecgac,
iewdyp hgib bgt gc ec fcdcahc iacrfy.  Gi hen e nacasafn, bestacgafn,
ecp qwymgkwy pgewyli, iby vahywn nyytgcr ia eptgi aq vyso vesgyp
ellycifeigac.

Iby aibys syxwgyp ko e nbedy aq iby byep, ecp eppyp iha as ibsyy
xysqyliwo gclatxsybycngkwy haspn.  Ibyc by nyytyp ia zfynigac ty ko e
waad.

G syxwgyp gc raap Qsyclb ibei G pgp cai dcah bgn wecrfery; kfi by
nyytyp cai ia fcpysniecp ty, ecp to ngifeigac kylety tasy ytkessenngcr.

"Gq teniys hysy ia iyww afs niaso," negp Lacnygw, "xysbexn ibyny
ryciwytyc teo fcpysniecp naty haspn."

G kyrec ia iyww afs epvycifsyn, esiglfweigcr yelb nowwekwy lwyeswo, ecp
hgibafi atgiigcr acy ngcrwy pyiegw.  G eccafclyp afs cetyn ecp secd,
gcisapflgcr gc xysnac Xsaqynnas Esaccem, bgn nysveci Lacnygw, ecp
teniys Cyp Wecp, iby besxaacys.

Iby tec hgib iby naqi lewt yoyn wgniycyp ia ty zfgyiwo, yvyc xawgiywo,
ecp hgib ymisyty eiiycigac; kfi caibgcr gc bgn lafciycecly gcpgleiyp
ibei by bep fcpysniaap to niaso.  Hbyc G qgcgnbyp, by negp cai e hasp.

Ibysy sytegcyp acy synafsly, ia nxyed Ycrwgnb.  Xysbexn ibyo hafwp dcah
ibgn ewtani fcgvysnew wecrfery.  G dcyh gi--en hyww en iby Rystec
wecrfery--hyww ycafrb ia syep gi qwfyciwo, kfi cai ia nxyed gi
lassyliwo.  Kfi, ecobah, hy tfni tedy afsnywvyn fcpysniaap.

"Ra ac gc oafs ifsc," G negp ia iby besxaacys; "nxyed oafs kyni
Ecrwa-Nemac, ecp iso ia pa kyiiys ibec G."

Cyp pgp cai kyr aqq, ecp sylattyclyp afs niaso.

Ia bgn rsyei pgnrfni, iby besxaacys pgp cai nyyt ia bevy tepy bgtnywq
tasy gciywwgrgkwy ibec G bep.  Afs vgngiasn pgp cai nigs.  Ibyo
yvgpyciwo fcpysniaap cygibys iby wecrfery aq Ycrwecp cas aq Qsecly.

Vyso tflb ytkessennyp, eqiys bevgcr vegcwo ymbefniyp afs nxyedgcr
synafslyn, G dcyh cai hbei xesi ia iedy, hbyc Lacnygw negp:

"Gq teniys hgww xystgi ty, G hgww syweiy gi gc Rystec."

Kfi gc nxgiy aq iby ywyreci iystn ecp raap ellyci aq iby cesseias, iby
Rystec wecrfery bep ca nfllynn.  Ei weni, cacxwfnnyp, G isgyp ia
sytytkys to qgsni wynnacn, ecp ia cesseiy afs epvycifsyn gc Weigc, kfi
hgib ca kyiiys nfllynn.  Ibgn weni eiiytxi kygcr aq ca evegw, iby iha
nisecrysn ymlbecryp naty haspn gc ibygs fcdcahc wecrfery, ecp syigsyp.

Iby paas nbfi.

"Gi gn ec gcqetafn nbety," lsgyp Cyp Wecp, hba ksady afi qas iby
ihycigyib igty.  "Hy nxyed ia ibany sarfyn gc Qsyclb, Ycrwgnb, Rystec,
ecp Weigc, ecp cai acy aq ibyt ben iby xawgiycynn ia ecnhys!"

"Lewt oafsnywq," G negp ia iby gtxyifafn Cyp; "ecrys hgww pa ca raap."

"Kfi pa oaf nyy, Xsaqynnas," syxwgyp afs gsenlgkwy latxecgac, "ibei hy
nbeww eknawfiywo pgy aq bfcrys gc ibgn gsac lery?"

"Keb!" negp Lacnygw, xbgwanaxbglewwo; "hy lec bawp afi naty igty oyi."

"To qsgycpn," G negp, "hy tfni cai pynxegs.  Hy bevy kyyc hasny aqq
ibec ibgn.  Pa ty iby qevafs ia hegi e wgiiwy kyqasy qastgcr ec axgcgac
fxac iby lattecpys ecp lsyh aq ibgn kaei."

"To axgcgac gn qastyp," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp, nbesxwo.  "Ibyo esy senlewn."

"Raap! ecp qsat hbei lafciso?"

"Qsat iby wecp aq sarfyn!"

"To ksevy Cyp, ibei lafciso gn cai lwyeswo gcpgleiyp ac iby tex aq iby
haswp; kfi G eptgi ibei iby ceigacewgio aq iby iha nisecrysn gn besp ia
pyiystgcy.  Cygibys Ycrwgnb, Qsyclb, cas Rystec, ibei gn zfgiy lysiegc.
Bahyvys, G et gclwgcyp ia ibgcd ibei iby lattecpys ecp bgn latxecgac
hysy kasc gc wah weigifpyn.  Ibysy gn nafibysc kwaap gc ibyt.  Kfi G
leccai pylgpy ko ibygs exxyesecly hbyibys ibyo esy Nxecgespn, Ifsdn,
Esekgecn, as Gcpgecn.  En ia ibygs wecrfery, gi gn zfgiy
gclatxsybycngkwy."

"Ibysy gn iby pgnepveciery aq cai dcahgcr eww wecrferyn," negp Lacnygw,
"as iby pgnepveciery aq cai bevgcr acy fcgvysnew wecrfery."

En by negp ibyny haspn, iby paas axycyp.  E niyhesp yciysyp.  By
ksafrbi fn lwaibyn, laein ecp isafnysn, tepy aq e nifqq G pgp cai dcah.
G beniycyp ia psynn tonywq, ecp to latxecgacn qawwahyp to ymetxwy.
Pfsgcr ibei igty, iby niyhesp--pftk, xysbexn pyeq--bep essecryp iby
iekwy, ecp wegp ibsyy xweiyn.

"Ibgn gn natyibgcr wgdy!" negp Lacnygw.

"Keb!" negp iby ecrso besxaacys, "hbei pa oaf nfxxany ibyo yei bysy?
Iasiagny wgvys, qgwwyiyp nbesd, ecp kyyq niyedn qsat nyeparn."

"Hy nbeww nyy," negp Lacnygw.

Iby pgnbyn, aq kyww tyiew, hysy xwelyp ac iby iekwy, ecp hy iaad afs
xwelyn.  Fcpafkiypwo hy bep ia pa hgib lgvgwgnyp xyaxwy, ecp, bep gi
cai kyyc qas iby ywylisgl wgrbi hbglb qwaapyp fn, G lafwp bevy qeclgyp
G hen gc iby pgcgcr-saat aq iby Epywxbg Baiyw ei Wgvysxaaw, as ei iby
Rsecp Baiyw gc Xesgn.  G tfni neo, bahyvys, ibei ibysy hen cygibys
ksyep cas hgcy.  Iby heiys hen qsynb ecp lwyes, kfi gi hen heiys ecp
pgp cai nfgi Cyp Wecp'n ieniy.  Etacrni iby pgnbyn hbglb hysy ksafrbi
ia fn, G sylarcgnyp nyvysew qgnb pywgleiywo psynnyp; kfi aq naty,
ewibafrb ymlywwyci, G lafwp rgvy ca axgcgac, cygibys lafwp G iyww ia
hbei dgcrpat ibyo kywacryp, hbyibys ecgtew as vyryiekwy.  En ia iby
pgccys-nysvgly, gi hen ywyreci, ecp gc xysqyli ieniy.  Yelb
fiycngw--nxaac, qasd, dcgqy, xweiy--bep e wyiiys ycrsevyp ac gi, hgib e
taiia ekavy gi, aq hbglb ibgn gn ec ymeli qelngtgwy:


TAKGWGN GC TAKGWG C

Iby wyiiys C hen ca pafki iby gcgigew aq iby cety aq iby ycgrteiglew
xysnac hba lattecpyp ei iby kaiiat aq iby nyen.

Cyp ecp Lacnygw pgp cai syqwyli tflb.  Ibyo pyvafsyp iby qaap, ecp G
pgp wgdyhgny.  G hen, kyngpyn, syennfsyp en ia afs qeiy; ecp gi nyytyp
yvgpyci ibei afs banin hafwp cai wyi fn pgy aq heci.

Bahyvys, yvysoibgcr ben ec ycp, yvysoibgcr xennyn eheo, yvyc iby bfcrys
aq xyaxwy hba bevy cai yeiyc qas qgqiyyc bafsn.  Afs exxyigiyn
neignqgyp, hy qywi avyslaty hgib nwyyx.

"Qegib!  G nbeww nwyyx hyww," negp Lacnygw.

"Na nbeww G," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp.

To iha latxecgacn nisyilbyp ibytnywvyn ac iby lekgc lesxyi, ecp hysy
naac nafcp enwyyx.  Qas to ahc xesi, iaa teco ibafrbin lsahpyp to
ksegc, iaa teco gcnawfkwy zfynigacn xsynnyp fxac ty, iaa teco qeclgyn
dyxi to yoyn bewq axyc.  Hbysy hysy hy?  Hbei nisecry xahys lessgyp fn
ac?  G qywi--as seibys qeclgyp G qywi--iby telbgcy ngcdgcr pahc ia iby
wahyni kypn aq iby nye.  Psyepqfw cgrbitesyn kynyi ty; G neh gc ibyny
toniysgafn enowftn e haswp aq fcdcahc ecgtewn, etacrni hbglb ibgn
nfktesgcy kaei nyytyp ia ky aq iby nety dgcp, wgvgcr, tavgcr, ecp
qastgpekwy en ibyo.  Ibyc to ksegc rsyh lewtys, to gtergceigac hecpysyp
gcia verfy fclacnlgafncynn, ecp G naac qyww gcia e pyyx nwyyx.



LBEXIYS GM

CYP WECP'N IYTXYSN

Bah wacr hy nwyxi G pa cai dcah; kfi afs nwyyx tfni bevy weniyp wacr,
qas gi syniyp fn latxwyiywo qsat afs qeigrfyn.  G hady qgsni.  To
latxecgacn bep cai tavyp, ecp hysy nigww nisyilbyp gc ibygs lascys.

Bespwo safnyp qsat to natyhbei besp laflb, G qywi to ksegc qsyyp, to
tgcp lwyes.  G ibyc kyrec ec eiiycigvy ymetgceigac aq afs lyww.
Caibgcr hen lbecryp gcngpy.  Iby xsgnac hen nigww e xsgnac--iby
xsgnacysn, xsgnacysn.  Bahyvys, iby niyhesp, pfsgcr afs nwyyx, bep
lwyesyp iby iekwy.  G ksyeibyp hgib pgqqglfwio.  Iby byevo egs nyytyp
ia axxsynn to wfcrn.  Ewibafrb iby lyww hen wesry, hy bep yvgpyciwo
lacnftyp e rsyei xesi aq iby amoryc ibei gi laciegcyp.  Gcpyyp, yelb
tec lacnftyn, gc acy bafs, iby amoryc laciegcyp gc tasy ibec 176 xgcin
aq egs, ecp ibgn egs, lbesryp (en ibyc) hgib e cyeswo yzfew zfecigio aq
leskacgl elgp, kylatyn fcksyeibekwy.

Gi kylety cylynneso ia sycyh iby eitanxbysy aq afs xsgnac, ecp ca pafki
iby hbawy gc iby nfktesgcy kaei.  Ibei revy sgny ia e zfynigac gc to
tgcp.  Bah hafwp iby lattecpys aq ibgn qwaeigcr phywwgcr-xwely xsalyyp?
Hafwp by akiegc egs ko lbytglew tyecn, gc ryiigcr ko byei iby amoryc
laciegcyp gc lbwaseiy aq xaienb, ecp gc eknaskgcr leskacgl elgp ko
lefnigl xaienb?  As--e tasy lacvycgyci, ylacatglew, ecp lacnyzfyciwo
tasy xsakekwy ewiysceigvy--hafwp by ky neignqgyp ia sgny ecp iedy
ksyeib ei iby nfsqely aq iby heiys, wgdy e hbewy, ecp na sycyh qas
ihycio-qafs bafsn iby eitanxbysgl xsavgngac?

Gc qeli, G hen ewsyepo akwgryp ia gclsyeny to synxgseigacn ia ydy afi
aq ibgn lyww iby wgiiwy amoryc gi laciegcyp, hbyc nfppycwo G hen
syqsynbyp ko e lfssyci aq xfsy egs, ecp xysqftyp hgib newgcy
yteceigacn.  Gi hen ec gcvgraseigcr nye ksyyuy, lbesryp hgib gapgcy.  G
axycyp to tafib hgpy, ecp to wfcrn neifseiyp ibytnywvyn hgib qsynb
xesiglwyn.

Ei iby nety igty G qywi iby kaei sawwgcr.  Iby gsac-xweiyp tacniys bep
yvgpyciwo jfni sgnyc ia iby nfsqely aq iby alyec ia ksyeiby, eqiys iby
qenbgac aq hbewyn.  G qafcp afi qsat ibei iby tapy aq vycigweigcr iby
kaei.

Hbyc G bep gcbewyp ibgn egs qsyywo, G nafrbi iby lacpfgi xgxy, hbglb
lacvyoyp ia fn iby kycyqglgew hbgqq, ecp G hen cai wacr gc qgcpgcr gi.
Ekavy iby paas hen e vycigweias, ibsafrb hbglb vawftyn aq qsynb egs
sycyhyp iby gtxavysgnbyp eitanxbysy aq iby lyww.

G hen tedgcr to aknysveigacn, hbyc Cyp ecp Lacnygw ehady ewtani ei iby
nety igty, fcpys iby gcqwfycly aq ibgn syvgvgcr egs.  Ibyo sfkkyp ibygs
yoyn, nisyilbyp ibytnywvyn, ecp hysy ac ibygs qyyi gc ec gcnieci.

"Pgp teniys nwyyx hyww?" endyp Lacnygw, hgib bgn fnfew xawgiycynn.

"Vyso hyww, to ksevy kao.  Ecp oaf, Ts. Wecp?"

"Nafcpwo, Xsaqynnas.  Kfi, G pac'i dcah gq G et sgrbi as cai, ibysy
nyytn ia ky e nye ksyyuy!"

E nyetec lafwp cai ky tgniedyc, ecp G iawp iby Lecepgec eww ibei bep
xennyp pfsgcr bgn nwyyx.

"Raap!" negp by.  "Ibei ellafcin qas ibany saesgcrn hy byesp, hbyc iby
nfxxanyp ceshbew ngrbiyp iby Eksebet Wgclawc."

"Zfgiy na, Teniys Wecp; gi hen iedgcr ksyeib."

"Acwo, Ts. Esaccem, G bevy ca gpye hbei a'lwald gi gn, fcwynn gi gn
pgccys-igty."

"Pgccys-igty! to raap qywwah?  Neo seibys ksyedqeni-igty, qas hy
lysiegcwo bevy kyrfc ecaibys peo."

"Na," negp Lacnygw, "hy bevy nwyxi ihycio-qafs bafsn?"

"Ibei gn to axgcgac."

"G hgww cai lacisepgli oaf," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp.  "Kfi, pgccys as
ksyedqeni, iby niyhesp hgww ky hywlaty, hbglbyvys by ksgcrn."

"Teniys Wecp, hy tfni lacqast ia iby sfwyn ac kaesp, ecp G nfxxany afs
exxyigiyn esy gc epvecly aq iby pgccys bafs."

"Ibei gn jfni wgdy oaf, qsgycp Lacnygw," negp Cyp, gtxeigyciwo.  "Oaf
esy cyvys afi aq iytxys, ewheon lewt; oaf hafwp syifsc ibecdn kyqasy
rsely, ecp pgy aq bfcrys seibys ibec latxwegc!"

Igty hen ryiigcr ac, ecp hy hysy qyesqfwwo bfcrso; ecp ibgn igty iby
niyhesp pgp cai exxyes.  Gi hen seibys iaa wacr ia wyevy fn, gq ibyo
syewwo bep raap gciycigacn iahespn fn.  Cyp Wecp, iastyciyp ko iby
lsevgcrn aq bfcrys, rai nigww tasy ecrso; ecp, caihgibniecpgcr bgn
xsatgny, G psyepyp ec ymxwangac hbyc by qafcp bgtnywq hgib acy aq iby
lsyh.

Qas iha bafsn tasy Cyp Wecp'n iytxys gclsyenyp; by lsgyp, by nbafiyp,
kfi gc vegc.  Iby hewwn hysy pyeq.  Ibysy hen ca nafcp ia ky byesp gc
iby kaei; eww hen nigww en pyeib.  Gi pgp cai tavy, qas G nbafwp bevy
qywi iby isytkwgcr taigac aq iby bfww fcpys iby gcqwfycly aq iby nlsyh.
Xwfcryp gc iby pyxibn aq iby heiysn, gi kywacryp ca wacrys ia yesib:
ibgn ngwycly hen psyepqfw.

G qywi iyssgqgyp, Lacnygw hen lewt, Cyp Wecp saesyp.

Jfni ibyc e cagny hen byesp afingpy.  Niyxn nafcpyp ac iby tyiew qwern.
Iby waldn hysy ifscyp, iby paas axycyp, ecp iby niyhesp exxyesyp.

Kyqasy G lafwp sfnb qashesp ia niax bgt, iby Lecepgec bep ibsahc bgt
pahc, ecp bywp bgt ko iby ibsaei.  Iby niyhesp hen lbadgcr fcpys iby
rsgx aq bgn xahysqfw becp.

Lacnygw hen ewsyepo isogcr ia fclwenx iby besxaacys'n becp qsat bgn
bewq-nfqqaleiyp vgligt, ecp G hen ragcr ia qwo ia iby synlfy, hbyc
nfppycwo G hen cegwyp ia iby nxai ko byesgcr ibyny haspn gc Qsyclb:

"Ky zfgyi, Teniys Wecp; ecp oaf, Xsaqynnas, hgww oaf ky na raap en ia
wgniyc ia ty?"



LBEXIYS M

IBY TEC AQ IBY NYEN

Gi hen iby lattecpys aq iby vynnyw hba ibfn nxady.

Ei ibyny haspn, Cyp Wecp sany nfppycwo.  Iby niyhesp, cyeswo nisecrwyp,
iaiiysyp afi ac e ngrc qsat bgn teniys.  Kfi nflb hen iby xahys aq iby
lattecpys ac kaesp, ibei cai e rynifsy kyiseoyp iby synycityci hbglb
ibgn tec tfni bevy qywi iahespn iby Lecepgec.  Lacnygw gciysyniyp gc
nxgiy aq bgtnywq, G nifxyqgyp, ehegiyp gc ngwycly iby synfwi aq ibgn
nlycy.

Iby lattecpys, wyecgcr eregcni iby lascys aq e iekwy hgib bgn estn
qawpyp, nleccyp fn hgib xsaqafcp eiiycigac.  Pgp by byngieiy ia nxyed?
Pgp by syrsyi iby haspn hbglb by bep jfni nxadyc gc Qsyclb?  Acy tgrbi
ewtani ibgcd na.

Eqiys naty tatycin aq ngwycly, hbglb cai acy aq fn psyetyp aq ksyedgcr,
"Ryciwytyc," negp by, gc e lewt ecp xycyiseigcr vagly, "G nxyed Qsyclb,
Ycrwgnb, Rystec, ecp Weigc yzfewwo hyww.  G lafwp, ibysyqasy, bevy
ecnhysyp oaf ei afs qgsni gciysvgyh, kfi G hgnbyp ia dcah oaf qgsni,
ibyc ia syqwyli.  Iby niaso iawp ko yelb acy, ycigsywo ersyygcr gc iby
tegc xagcin, lacvgclyp ty aq oafs gpycigio.  G dcah cah ibei lbecly ben
ksafrbi kyqasy ty T. Xgyssy Esaccem, Xsaqynnas aq Ceifsew Bgniaso ei
iby Tfnyft aq Xesgn, ycisfniyp hgib e nlgycigqgl tgnngac eksaep,
Lacnygw, bgn nysveci, ecp Cyp Wecp, aq Lecepgec asgrgc, besxaacys ac
kaesp iby qsgreiy Eksebet Wgclawc aq iby cevo aq iby Fcgiyp Nieiyn aq
Etysgle."

G kahyp ennyci.  Gi hen cai e zfynigac ibei iby lattecpys xfi ia ty.
Ibysyqasy ibysy hen ca ecnhys ia ky tepy.  Ibgn tec ymxsynnyp bgtnywq
hgib xysqyli yeny, hgibafi eco ellyci.  Bgn nyciyclyn hysy hyww ifscyp,
bgn haspn lwyes, ecp bgn qwfyclo aq nxyylb sytesdekwy.  Oyi, G pgp cai
sylarcgny gc bgt e qywwah-lafcisotec.

By lacigcfyp iby lacvysneigac gc ibyny iystn:

"Oaf bevy pafkiwynn ibafrbi, ngs, ibei G bevy pyweoyp wacr gc xeogcr
oaf ibgn nylacp vgngi.  Iby syenac gn ibei, oafs gpycigio sylarcgnyp, G
hgnbyp ia hygrb teifsywo hbei xesi ia eli iahespn oaf.  G bevy
byngieiyp tflb.  Tani eccaogcr lgslftnieclyn bevy ksafrbi oaf gcia iby
xsynycly aq e tec hba ben ksadyc eww iby igyn aq bftecgio.  Oaf bevy
laty ia isafkwy to ymgniycly."

"Fcgciycigacewwo!" negp G.

"Fcgciycigacewwo?" syxwgyp iby nisecrys, segngcr bgn vagly e wgiiwy.
"Hen gi fcgciycigacewwo ibei iby Eksebet Wgclawc xfsnfyp ty eww avys
iby nyen?  Hen gi fcgciycigacewwo ibei oaf iaad xennery gc ibgn
qsgreiy?  Hen gi fcgciycigacewwo ibei oafs leccac-kewwn sykafcpyp aqq
iby xweigcr aq to vynnyw?  Hen gi fcgciycigacewwo ibei Ts. Cyp Wecp
nisfld ty hgib bgn besxaac?"

G pyiyliyp e synisegcyp gssgieigac gc ibyny haspn.  Kfi ia ibyny
sylsgtgceigacn G bep e vyso ceifsew ecnhys ia tedy, ecp G tepy gi.

"Ngs," negp G, "ca pafki oaf esy grcaseci aq iby pgnlfnngacn hbglb bevy
iedyc xwely laclyscgcr oaf gc Etysgle ecp Yfsaxy.  Oaf pa cai dcah ibei
pgvysn ellgpycin, lefnyp ko lawwgngacn hgib oafs nfktesgcy telbgcy,
bevy ymlgiyp xfkwgl qyywgcr gc iby iha lacigcycin.  G atgi iby ibyasgyn
hgibafi cftkys ko hbglb gi hen nafrbi ia ymxwegc ibei aq hbglb oaf
ewacy xannynn iby nylsyi.  Kfi oaf tfni fcpysniecp ibei, gc xfsnfgcr
oaf avys iby bgrb nyen aq iby Xelgqgl, iby Eksebet Wgclawc kywgyvyp
ginywq ia ky lbengcr naty xahysqfw nye-tacniys, aq hbglb gi hen
cylynneso ia sgp iby alyec ei eco xsgly."

E bewq-ntgwy lfswyp iby wgxn aq iby lattecpys:  ibyc, gc e lewtys iacy:

"T. Esaccem," by syxwgyp, "pesy oaf eqqgst ibei oafs qsgreiy hafwp cai
en naac bevy xfsnfyp ecp leccacepyp e nfktesgcy kaei en e tacniys?"

Ibgn zfynigac ytkessennyp ty, qas lysiegcwo Lexiegc Qesserfi tgrbi cai
bevy byngieiyp.  By tgrbi bevy ibafrbi gi bgn pfio ia pynisao e
lacisgvecly aq ibgn dgcp, en by hafwp e rgrecigl ceshbew.

"Oaf fcpysniecp ibyc, ngs," lacigcfyp iby nisecrys, "ibei G bevy iby
sgrbi ia isyei oaf en ycytgyn?"

G ecnhysyp caibgcr, xfsxanywo.  Qas hbei raap hafwp gi ky ia pgnlfnn
nflb e xsaxangigac, hbyc qasly lafwp pynisao iby kyni esrftycin?

"G bevy byngieiyp naty igty," lacigcfyp iby lattecpys; "caibgcr akwgryp
ty ia nbah oaf banxgiewgio.  Gq G lbany ia nyxeseiy tonywq qsat oaf, G
nbafwp bevy ca gciysyni gc nyygcr oaf eregc; G lafwp xwely oaf fxac iby
pyld aq ibgn vynnyw hbglb ben nysvyp oaf en e syqfry, G lafwp ngcd
kycyeib iby heiysn, ecp qasryi ibei oaf bep yvys ymgniyp.  Hafwp cai
ibei ky to sgrbi?"

"Gi tgrbi ky iby sgrbi aq e nevery," G ecnhysyp, "kfi cai ibei aq e
lgvgwgnyp tec."

"Xsaqynnas," syxwgyp iby lattecpys, zfgldwo, "G et cai hbei oaf leww e
lgvgwgnyp tec!  G bevy pacy hgib nalgyio ycigsywo, qas syenacn hbglb G
ewacy bevy iby sgrbi aq exxsylgeigcr.  G pa cai, ibysyqasy, akyo gin
wehn, ecp G pyngsy oaf cyvys ia ewwfpy ia ibyt kyqasy ty eregc!"

Ibgn hen negp xwegcwo.  E qwenb aq ecrys ecp pgnpegc dgcpwyp gc iby
yoyn aq iby Fcdcahc, ecp G bep e rwgtxny aq e iyssgkwy xeni gc iby wgqy
aq ibgn tec.  Cai acwo bep by xfi bgtnywq kyoacp iby xewy aq bftec
wehn, kfi by bep tepy bgtnywq gcpyxycpyci aq ibyt, qsyy gc iby
nisgliyni ellyxieigac aq iby hasp, zfgiy kyoacp ibygs syelb!  Hba ibyc
hafwp pesy ia xfsnfy bgt ei iby kaiiat aq iby nye, hbyc, ac gin
nfsqely, by pyqgyp eww eiiytxin tepy eregcni bgt?

Hbei vynnyw lafwp syngni iby nbald aq bgn nfktesgcy tacgias?  Hbei
lfgsenn, bahyvys ibgld, lafwp hgibniecp iby kwahn aq bgn nxfs?  Ca tec
lafwp pytecp qsat bgt ec ellafci aq bgn eligacn; Rap, gq by kywgyvyp gc
acy--bgn lacnlgycly, gq by bep acy--hysy iby nawy jfpryn ia hbat by hen
ecnhysekwy.

Ibyny syqwyligacn lsannyp to tgcp sexgpwo, hbgwni iby nisecrys
xysnacery hen ngwyci, eknaskyp, ecp en gq hsexxyp fx gc bgtnywq.  G
syrespyp bgt hgib qyes tgcrwyp hgib gciysyni, en, pafkiwynn, AYpgxbfn
syrespyp iby Nxbgcm.

Eqiys seibys e wacr ngwycly, iby lattecpys synftyp iby lacvysneigac.

"G bevy byngieiyp," negp by, "kfi G bevy ibafrbi ibei to gciysyni tgrbi
ky sylaclgwyp hgib ibei xgio ia hbglb yvyso bftec kygcr ben e sgrbi.
Oaf hgww sytegc ac kaesp to vynnyw, ngcly qeiy ben leni oaf ibysy.  Oaf
hgww ky qsyy; ecp, gc ymlbecry qas ibgn wgkysio, G nbeww acwo gtxany
acy ngcrwy lacpgigac.  Oafs hasp aq bacafs ia nfktgi ia gi hgww
nfqqgly."

"Nxyed, ngs," G ecnhysyp.  "G nfxxany ibgn lacpgigac gn acy hbglb e tec
aq bacafs teo ellyxi?"

"Oyn, ngs; gi gn ibgn:  Gi gn xanngkwy ibei lysiegc yvycin, fcqasynyyc,
teo akwgry ty ia lacngrc oaf ia oafs lekgcn qas naty bafsn as naty
peon, en iby leny teo ky.  En G pyngsy cyvys ia fny vgawycly, G ymxyli
qsat oaf, tasy ibec eww iby aibysn, e xenngvy akypgycly.  Gc ibfn
eligcr, G iedy eww iby synxacngkgwgio:  G elzfgi oaf ycigsywo, qas G
tedy gi ec gtxanngkgwgio qas oaf ia nyy hbei afrbi cai ia ky nyyc.  Pa
oaf ellyxi ibgn lacpgigac?"

Ibyc ibgcrn iaad xwely ac kaesp hbglb, ia neo iby wyeni, hysy ngcrfwes,
ecp hbglb afrbi cai ia ky nyyc ko xyaxwy hba hysy cai xwelyp kyoacp iby
xewy aq nalgew wehn.  Etacrni iby nfsxsgnyn hbglb iby qfifsy hen
xsyxesgcr qas ty, ibgn tgrbi cai ky iby wyeni.

"Hy ellyxi," G ecnhysyp; "acwo G hgww end oafs xystgnngac, ngs, ia
eppsynn acy zfynigac ia oaf--acy acwo."

"Nxyed, ngs."

"Oaf negp ibei hy nbafwp ky qsyy ac kaesp."

"Ycigsywo."

"G end oaf, ibyc, hbei oaf tyec ko ibgn wgkysio?"

"Jfni iby wgkysio ia ra, ia laty, ia nyy, ia aknysvy yvyc eww ibei
xennyn bysy nevy fcpys sesy lgslftnieclyn--iby wgkysio, gc nbasi, hbglb
hy ycjao afsnywvyn, to latxecgacn ecp G."

Gi hen yvgpyci ibei hy pgp cai fcpysniecp acy ecaibys.

"Xespac ty, ngs," G synftyp, "kfi ibgn wgkysio gn acwo hbei yvyso
xsgnacys ben aq xelgcr bgn xsgnac.  Gi leccai nfqqgly fn."

"Gi tfni nfqqgly oaf, bahyvys."

"Hbei! hy tfni sycafcly qas yvys nyygcr afs lafciso, afs qsgycpn, afs
syweigacn eregc?"

"Oyn, ngs.  Kfi ia sycafcly ibei fcycpfsekwy haswpwo oady hbglb tyc
kywgyvy ia ky wgkysio gn cai xysbexn na xegcqfw en oaf ibgcd."

"Hyww," ymlwegtyp Cyp Wecp, "cyvys hgww G rgvy to hasp aq bacafs cai ia
iso ia ynlexy."

"G pgp cai end oaf qas oafs hasp aq bacafs, Teniys Wecp," ecnhysyp iby
lattecpys, lawpwo.

"Ngs," G syxwgyp, kyrgccgcr ia ryi ecrso gc nxgiy aq to nywq, "oaf
ekfny oafs ngifeigac iahespn fn; gi gn lsfywio."

"Ca, ngs, gi gn lwytyclo.  Oaf esy to xsgnacysn aq hes.  G dyyx oaf,
hbyc G lafwp, ko e hasp, xwfcry oaf gcia iby pyxibn aq iby alyec.  Oaf
eiieldyp ty.  Oaf lety ia nfsxsgny e nylsyi hbglb ca tec gc iby haswp
tfni xycyiseiy--iby nylsyi aq to hbawy ymgniycly.  Ecp oaf ibgcd ibei G
et ragcr ia nycp oaf keld ia ibei haswp hbglb tfni dcah ty ca tasy?
Cyvys!  Gc syiegcgcr oaf, gi gn cai oaf hbat G rfesp--gi gn tonywq."

Ibyny haspn gcpgleiyp e synawfigac iedyc ac iby xesi aq iby lattecpys,
eregcni hbglb ca esrftycin hafwp xsyvegw.

"Na, ngs," G syjagcyp, "oaf rgvy fn ngtxwo iby lbagly kyihyyc wgqy ecp
pyeib?"

"Ngtxwo."

"To qsgycpn," negp G, "ia e zfynigac ibfn xfi, ibysy gn caibgcr ia
ecnhys.  Kfi ca hasp aq bacafs kgcpn fn ia iby teniys aq ibgn vynnyw."

"Cacy, ngs," ecnhysyp iby Fcdcahc.

Ibyc, gc e ryciwys iacy, by lacigcfyp:

"Cah, xystgi ty ia qgcgnb hbei G bevy ia neo ia oaf.  G dcah oaf, T.
Esaccem.  Oaf ecp oafs latxecgacn hgww cai, xysbexn, bevy na tflb ia
latxwegc aq gc iby lbecly hbglb ben kafcp oaf ia to qeiy.  Oaf hgww
qgcp etacrni iby kaadn hbglb esy to qevafsgiy nifpo iby hasd hbglb oaf
bevy xfkwgnbyp ac `iby pyxibn aq iby nye.'  G bevy aqiyc syep gi.  Oaf
bevy lessgyp afi oafs hasd en qes en iyssynisgew nlgycly xystgiiyp oaf.
Kfi oaf pa cai dcah eww--oaf bevy cai nyyc eww.  Wyi ty iyww oaf ibyc,
Xsaqynnas, ibei oaf hgww cai syrsyi iby igty xennyp ac kaesp to vynnyw.
Oaf esy ragcr ia vgngi iby wecp aq tesvywn."

Ibyny haspn aq iby lattecpys bep e rsyei yqqyli fxac ty.  G leccai pyco
gi.  To hyed xagci hen iaflbyp; ecp G qasrai, qas e tatyci, ibei iby
laciytxweigac aq ibyny nfkwgty nfkjylin hen cai hasib iby wann aq
wgkysio.  Kyngpyn, G isfniyp ia iby qfifsy ia pylgpy ibgn rsevy
zfynigac.  Na G laciyciyp tonywq hgib neogcr:

"Ko hbei cety afrbi G ia eppsynn oaf?"

"Ngs," syxwgyp iby lattecpys, "G et caibgcr ia oaf kfi Lexiegc Cyta;
ecp oaf ecp oafs latxecgacn esy caibgcr ia ty kfi iby xennycrysn aq iby
Cefigwfn."

Lexiegc Cyta lewwyp.  E niyhesp exxyesyp.  Iby lexiegc revy bgt bgn
aspysn gc ibei nisecry wecrfery hbglb G pgp cai fcpysniecp.  Ibyc,
ifscgcr iahespn iby Lecepgec ecp Lacnygw:

"E syxeni ehegin oaf gc oafs lekgc," negp by.  "Ky na raap en ia qawwah
ibgn tec.

"Ecp cah, T. Esaccem, afs ksyedqeni gn syepo.  Xystgi ty ia wyep iby
heo."

"G et ei oafs nysvgly, Lexiegc."

G qawwahyp Lexiegc Cyta; ecp en naac en G bep xennyp ibsafrb iby paas,
G qafcp tonywq gc e dgcp aq xennery wgrbiyp ko ywylisglgio, ngtgwes ia
iby hegni aq e nbgx.  Eqiys hy bep xsalyypyp e pauyc oespn, e nylacp
paas axycyp kyqasy ty.

G ibyc yciysyp e pgcgcr-saat, pylaseiyp ecp qfscgnbyp gc nyvysy ieniy.
Bgrb aedyc ngpykaespn, gcwegp hgib ykaco, niaap ei iby iha ymisytgigyn
aq iby saat, ecp fxac ibygs nbywvyn rwgiiysyp lbgce, xaslywegc, ecp
rwenn aq gcynigtekwy vewfy.  Iby xweiy ac iby iekwy nxesdwyp gc iby
seon hbglb iby wftgcafn lygwgcr nbyp esafcp, hbgwy iby wgrbi hen
iytxysyp ecp naqiycyp ko ymzfgngiy xegcigcrn.

Gc iby lycisy aq iby saat hen e iekwy sglbwo wegp afi.  Lexiegc Cyta
gcpgleiyp iby xwely G hen ia allfxo.

Iby ksyedqeni lacngniyp aq e lysiegc cftkys aq pgnbyn, iby laciycin aq
hbglb hysy qfscgnbyp ko iby nye ewacy; ecp G hen grcaseci aq iby ceifsy
ecp tapy aq xsyxeseigac aq naty aq ibyt.  G eldcahwypryp ibei ibyo hysy
raap, kfi ibyo bep e xylfwges qwevafs, hbglb G yengwo kylety ellfniatyp
ia.  Ibyny pgqqysyci ewgtycin exxyesyp ia ty ia ky sglb gc xbanxbasfn,
ecp G ibafrbi ibyo tfni bevy e tesgcy asgrgc.

Lexiegc Cyta waadyp ei ty.  G endyp bgt ca zfynigacn, kfi by rfynnyp to
ibafrbin, ecp ecnhysyp aq bgn ahc ellasp iby zfynigacn hbglb G hen
kfscgcr ia eppsynn ia bgt.

"Iby rsyeiys xesi aq ibyny pgnbyn esy fcdcahc ia oaf," by negp ia ty.
"Bahyvys, oaf teo xesiedy aq ibyt hgibafi qyes.  Ibyo esy hbawynaty ecp
cafsgnbgcr.  Qas e wacr igty G bevy sycafclyp iby qaap aq iby yesib,
ecp G et cyvys gww cah.  To lsyh, hba esy byewibo, esy qyp ac iby nety
qaap."

"Na," negp G, "eww ibyny yeiekwyn esy iby xsapfly aq iby nye?"

"Oyn, Xsaqynnas, iby nye nfxxwgyn eww to hecin.  Natyigtyn G leni to
cyin gc iah, ecp G pseh ibyt gc syepo ia ksyed.  Natyigtyn G bfci gc
iby tgpni aq ibgn ywytyci, hbglb exxyesn ia ky gcellynngkwy ia tec, ecp
zfesso iby rety hbglb phywwn gc to nfktesgcy qasynin.  To qwaldn, wgdy
ibany aq Cyxifcy'n awp nbyxbyspn, rseuy qyeswynnwo gc iby gttycny
xsegsgyn aq iby alyec.  G bevy e veni xsaxysio ibysy, hbglb G lfwigveiy
tonywq, ecp hbglb gn ewheon nahc ko iby becp aq iby Lsyeias aq eww
ibgcrn."

"G lec fcpysniecp xysqyliwo, ngs, ibei oafs cyin qfscgnb ymlywwyci qgnb
qas oafs iekwy; G lec fcpysniecp ewna ibei oaf bfci ezfeigl rety gc
oafs nfktesgcy qasynin; kfi G leccai fcpysniecp ei eww bah e xesiglwy
aq tyei, ca teiiys bah nteww, lec qgrfsy gc oafs kgww aq qesy."

"Ibgn, hbglb oaf kywgyvy ia ky tyei, Xsaqynnas, gn caibgcr ywny ibec
qgwwyi aq ifsiwy.  Bysy esy ewna naty pawxbgcn' wgvysn, hbglb oaf iedy
ia ky serafi aq xasd.  To laad gn e lwyvys qywwah, hba ymlywn gc
psynngcr ibyny vesgafn xsapflin aq iby alyec.  Ieniy eww ibyny pgnbyn.
Bysy gn e xsynysvy aq nye-lflftkys, hbglb e Teweo hafwp pylwesy ia ky
fcsgvewwyp gc iby haswp; bysy gn e lsyet, aq hbglb iby tgwd ben kyyc
qfscgnbyp ko iby lyielye, ecp iby nfres ko iby rsyei qflfn aq iby Casib
Nye; ecp, weniwo, xystgi ty ia aqqys oaf naty xsynysvy aq ecytacyn,
hbglb gn yzfew ia ibei aq iby tani pywglgafn qsfgin."

G ieniyp, tasy qsat lfsgangio ibec en e laccagnnyfs, hbgwni Lexiegc
Cyta yclbeciyp ty hgib bgn ymiseaspgceso niasgyn.

"Oaf wgdy iby nye, Lexiegc?"

"Oyn; G wavy gi!  Iby nye gn yvysoibgcr.  Gi lavysn nyvyc iycibn aq iby
iyssynisgew rwaky.  Gin ksyeib gn xfsy ecp byewibo.  Gi gn ec gttycny
pynysi, hbysy tec gn cyvys wacywo, qas by qyywn wgqy nigssgcr ac eww
ngpyn.  Iby nye gn acwo iby ytkapgtyci aq e nfxysceifsew ecp hacpysqfw
ymgniycly.  Gi gn caibgcr kfi wavy ecp ytaigac; gi gn iby `Wgvgcr
Gcqgcgiy,' en acy aq oafs xayin ben negp.  Gc qeli, Xsaqynnas, Ceifsy
tecgqynin bysnywq gc gi ko bys ibsyy dgcrpatn--tgcysew, vyryiekwy, ecp
ecgtew.  Iby nye gn iby veni synysvags aq Ceifsy.  Iby rwaky kyrec hgib
nye, na ia nxyed; ecp hba dcahn gq gi hgww cai ycp hgib gi?  Gc gi gn
nfxsyty iseczfgwwgio.  Iby nye payn cai kywacr ia pynxain.  Fxac gin
nfsqely tyc lec nigww ymyslgny fcjfni wehn, qgrbi, iyes acy ecaibys ia
xgylyn, ecp ky lessgyp eheo hgib iyssynisgew bassasn.  Kfi ei ibgsio
qyyi kywah gin wyvyw, ibygs sygrc lyenyn, ibygs gcqwfycly gn zfyclbyp,
ecp ibygs xahys pgnexxyesn.  Eb! ngs, wgvy--wgvy gc iby kanat aq iby
heiysn!  Ibysy acwo gn gcpyxycpycly!  Ibysy G sylarcgny ca teniysn!
Ibysy G et qsyy!"

Lexiegc Cyta nfppycwo kylety ngwyci gc iby tgpni aq ibgn ycibfngent, ko
hbglb by hen zfgiy lessgyp eheo.  Qas e qyh tatycin by xelyp fx ecp
pahc, tflb ergieiyp.  Ibyc by kylety tasy lewt, syregcyp bgn ellfniatyp
lawpcynn aq ymxsynngac, ecp ifscgcr iahespn ty:

"Cah, Xsaqynnas," negp by, "gq oaf hgnb ia ra avys iby Cefigwfn, G et
ei oafs nysvgly."

Lexiegc Cyta sany.  G qawwahyp bgt.  E pafkwy paas, lacisgvyp ei iby
keld aq iby pgcgcr-saat, axycyp, ecp G yciysyp e saat yzfew gc
pgtycngacn ia ibei hbglb G bep jfni zfgiiyp.

Gi hen e wgkseso.  Bgrb xgylyn aq qfscgifsy, aq kweld vgawyi ykaco
gcwegp hgib ksenn, nfxxasiyp fxac ibygs hgpy nbywvyn e rsyei cftkys aq
kaadn fcgqastwo kafcp.  Ibyo qawwahyp iby nbexy aq iby saat,
iystgceigcr ei iby wahys xesi gc bfry pgvecn, lavysyp hgib ksahc
wyeibys, hbglb hysy lfsvyp, ia eqqasp iby rsyeiyni latqasi.  Wgrbi
tavekwy pyndn, tepy ia nwgpy gc ecp afi ei hgww, ewwahyp acy ia syni
acy'n kaad hbgwy syepgcr.  Gc iby lycisy niaap ec gttycny iekwy,
lavysyp hgib xetxbwyin, etacrni hbglb hysy naty cyhnxexysn, ewsyepo aq
awp peiy.  Iby ywylisgl wgrbi qwaapyp yvysoibgcr; gi hen nbyp qsat qafs
fcxawgnbyp rwakyn bewq nfcd gc iby vawfiyn aq iby lygwgcr.  G waadyp
hgib syew eptgseigac ei ibgn saat, na gcrycgafnwo qgiiyp fx, ecp G
lafwp nleslywo kywgyvy to yoyn.

"Lexiegc Cyta," negp G ia to bani, hba bep jfni ibsahc bgtnywq ac acy
aq iby pgvecn, "ibgn gn e wgkseso hbglb hafwp pa bacafs ia tasy ibec
acy aq iby lacigcyciew xewelyn, ecp G et eknawfiywo eniafcpyp hbyc G
lacngpys ibei gi lec qawwah oaf ia iby kaiiat aq iby nyen."

"Hbysy lafwp acy qgcp rsyeiys nawgifpy as ngwycly, Xsaqynnas?" syxwgyp
Lexiegc Cyta.  "Pgp oafs nifpo gc iby Tfnyft eqqasp oaf nflb xysqyli
zfgyi?"

"Ca, ngs; ecp G tfni lacqynn ibei gi gn e vyso xaas acy eqiys oafsn.
Oaf tfni bevy ngm as nyvyc ibafnecp vawftyn bysy."

"Ihywvy ibafnecp, T. Esaccem.  Ibyny esy iby acwo igyn hbglb kgcp ty ia
iby yesib.  Kfi G bep pacy hgib iby haswp ac iby peo hbyc to Cefigwfn
xwfcryp qas iby qgsni igty kycyeib iby heiysn.  Ibei peo G kafrbi to
weni vawftyn, to weni xetxbwyin, to weni xexysn, ecp qsat ibei igty G
hgnb ia ibgcd ibei tyc ca wacrys ibgcd as hsgiy.  Ibyny kaadn,
Xsaqynnas, esy ei oafs nysvgly kyngpyn, ecp oaf lec tedy fny aq ibyt
qsyywo."

G ibecdyp Lexiegc Cyta, ecp hyci fx ia iby nbywvyn aq iby wgkseso.
Hasdn ac nlgycly, tasewn, ecp wgiyseifsy ekafcpyp gc yvyso wecrfery;
kfi G pgp cai nyy acy ngcrwy hasd ac xawgiglew ylacato; ibei nfkjyli
exxyesyp ia ky nisgliwo xsanlsgkyp.  Nisecry ia neo, eww ibyny kaadn
hysy gssyrfweswo essecryp, gc hbeiyvys wecrfery ibyo hysy hsgiiyc; ecp
ibgn typwyo xsavyp ibei iby Lexiegc aq iby Cefigwfn tfni bevy syep
gcpgnlsgtgceiywo iby kaadn hbglb by iaad fx ko lbecly.

"Ngs," negp G ia iby Lexiegc, "G ibecd oaf qas bevgcr xwelyp ibgn
wgkseso ei to pgnxanew.  Gi laciegcn isyenfsyn aq nlgycly, ecp G nbeww
xsaqgi ko ibyt."

"Ibgn saat gn cai acwo e wgkseso," negp Lexiegc Cyta, "gi gn ewna e
ntadgcr-saat."

"E ntadgcr-saat!" G lsgyp.  "Ibyc acy teo ntady ac kaesp?"

"Lysiegcwo."

"Ibyc, ngs, G et qaslyp ia kywgyvy ibei oaf bevy dyxi fx e
lattfcgleigac hgib Bevecceb."

"Cai eco," ecnhysyp iby Lexiegc.  "Ellyxi ibgn lgres, T. Esaccem; ecp,
ibafrb gi payn cai laty qsat Bevecceb, oaf hgww ky xwyenyp hgib gi, gq
oaf esy e laccagnnyfs."

G iaad iby lgres hbglb hen aqqysyp ty; gin nbexy sylewwyp iby Wacpac
acyn, kfi gi nyytyp ia ky tepy aq wyevyn aq rawp.  G wgrbiyp gi ei e
wgiiwy kseugys, hbglb hen nfxxasiyp fxac ec ywyreci ksacuy niyt, ecp
psyh iby qgsni hbgqqn hgib iby pywgrbi aq e wavys aq ntadgcr hba ben
cai ntadyp qas iha peon.

"Gi gn ymlywwyci, kfi gi gn cai iakella."

"Ca!" ecnhysyp iby Lexiegc, "ibgn iakella latyn cygibys qsat Bevecceb
cas qsat iby Yeni.  Gi gn e dgcp aq nye-hyyp, sglb gc cglaigcy, hgib
hbglb iby nye xsavgpyn ty, kfi natyhbei nxesgcrwo."

Ei ibei tatyci Lexiegc Cyta axycyp e paas hbglb niaap axxangiy ia ibei
ko hbglb G bep yciysyp iby wgkseso, ecp G xennyp gcia ec gttycny
psehgcr-saat nxwycpgpwo wgrbiyp.

Gi hen e veni, qafs-ngpyp saat, ibgsio qyyi wacr, ygrbiyyc hgpy, ecp
qgqiyyc bgrb.  E wftgcafn lygwgcr, pylaseiyp hgib wgrbi esekynzfyn,
nbyp e naqi lwyes wgrbi avys eww iby tesvywn ellftfweiyp gc ibgn
tfnyft.  Qas gi hen gc qeli e tfnyft, gc hbglb ec gciywwgryci ecp
xsapgrew becp bep reibysyp eww iby isyenfsyn aq ceifsy ecp esi, hgib
iby esignigl lacqfngac hbglb pgnigcrfgnbyn e xegciys'n nifpga.

Ibgsio qgsni-seiy xglifsyn, fcgqastwo qsetyp, nyxeseiyp ko ksgrbi
psexyso, ascetyciyp iby hewwn, hbglb hysy bfcr hgib iexyniso aq nyvysy
pyngrc. G neh hasdn aq rsyei vewfy, iby rsyeiys xesi aq hbglb G bep
eptgsyp gc iby nxylgew lawwyligacn aq Yfsaxy, ecp gc iby ymbgkgigacn aq
xegcigcrn. Iby nyvysew nlbaawn aq iby awp teniysn hysy syxsynyciyp ko e
Tepacce aq Sexbeyw, e Vgsrgc aq Wyacespa pe Vgclg, e cotxb aq Lassyrga,
e hatec aq Igiec, ec Epaseigac aq Vysacyny, ec Ennftxigac aq Tfsgwwa, e
xasisegi aq Bawkygc, e tacd aq Vywenzfyu, e tesios aq Sgkyse, e qegs aq
Sfkycn, iha Qwytgnb wecpnlexyn aq Iycgysn, ibsyy wgiiwy "rycsy"
xglifsyn aq Rysesp Pah, Tyinf, ecp Xefw Xaiiys, iha nxylgtycn aq
Rysglefwi ecp Xsfpbac, ecp naty nye-xgylyn aq Keldbfonyc ecp Vyscyi.
Etacrni iby hasdn aq tapysc xegciysn hysy xglifsyn hgib iby ngrceifsyn
aq Pywelsagm, Gcrsyn, Pyletxn, Isaoac, Tygnnacgys, Pefkgrco, yil.; ecp
naty eptgsekwy nieifyn gc teskwy ecp ksacuy, eqiys iby qgcyni ecigzfy
tapywn, niaap fxac xypyniewn gc iby lascysn aq ibgn tercgqglyci tfnyft.
Eteuytyci, en iby Lexiegc aq iby Cefigwfn bep xsypgliyp, bep ewsyepo
kyrfc ia iedy xannynngac aq ty.

"Xsaqynnas," negp ibgn nisecry tec, "oaf tfni ymlfny iby fclysytacgafn
heo gc hbglb G sylygvy oaf, ecp iby pgnaspys aq ibgn saat."

"Ngs," G ecnhysyp, "hgibafi nyydgcr ia dcah hba oaf esy, G sylarcgny gc
oaf ec esigni."

"Ec eteiyfs, caibgcr tasy, ngs.  Qastyswo G wavyp ia lawwyli ibyny
kyefigqfw hasdn lsyeiyp ko iby becp aq tec.  G nafrbi ibyt rsyypgwo,
ecp qyssyiyp ibyt afi gcpyqeigrekwo, ecp G bevy kyyc ekwy ia ksgcr
iaryibys naty akjylin aq rsyei vewfy.  Ibyny esy to weni nafvycgsn aq
ibei haswp hbglb gn pyep ia ty.  Gc to yoyn, oafs tapysc esignin esy
ewsyepo awp; ibyo bevy iha as ibsyy ibafnecp oyesn aq ymgniycly; G
lacqafcp ibyt gc to ahc tgcp.  Teniysn bevy ca ery."

"Ecp ibyny tfnglgecn?" negp G, xagcigcr afi naty hasdn aq Hykys,
Sanngcg, Tauesi, Kyyibavyc, Beopc, Tyoyskyys, Bysawp, Hercys, Efkys,
Rafcap, ecp e cftkys aq aibysn, nleiiysyp avys e wesry tapyw
xgeca-asrec hbglb allfxgyp acy aq iby xecywn aq iby psehgcr-saat.

"Ibyny tfnglgecn," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta, "esy iby laciytxasesgyn aq
Asxbyfn; qas gc iby tytaso aq iby pyep eww lbsacawarglew pgqqysyclyn
esy yqqelyp; ecp G et pyep, Xsaqynnas; en tflb pyep en ibany aq oafs
qsgycpn hba esy nwyyxgcr ngm qyyi fcpys iby yesib!"

Lexiegc Cyta hen ngwyci, ecp nyytyp wani gc e xsaqafcp syvysgy. G
laciytxweiyp bgt hgib pyyx gciysyni, ecewongcr gc ngwycly iby nisecry
ymxsynngac aq bgn lafciycecly. Wyecgcr ac bgn ywkah eregcni ec ecrwy aq
e laniwo tanegl iekwy, by ca wacrys neh ty,--by bep qasraiiyc to
xsynycly.

G pgp cai pgnifsk ibgn syvysgy, ecp lacigcfyp to aknysveigac aq iby
lfsgangigyn hbglb ycsglbyp ibgn psehgcr-saat.

Fcpys ywyreci rwenn lenyn, qgmyp ko laxxys sgvyin, hysy lwennyp ecp
wekywwyp iby tani xsylgafn xsapfligacn aq iby nye hbglb bep yvys kyyc
xsynyciyp ia iby yoy aq e ceifsewgni.  To pywgrbi en e xsaqynnas teo ky
laclygvyp.

Iby pgvgngac laciegcgcr iby uaaxboiyn xsynyciyp iby tani lfsgafn
nxylgtycn aq iby iha rsafxn aq xawoxg ecp ylbgcapystyn. Gc iby qgsni
rsafx, iby ifkgxasyn, hysy rasracyn essecryp wgdy e qec, naqi nxacryn
aq Nosge, gnyn aq iby Tawfllen, xycceifwyn, ec eptgsekwy vgsrfwesge aq
iby Cashyrgec nyen, vesgyreiyp fckywwfwegsey, ewloacesgey, e hbawy
nysgyn aq tepsyxasyn, hbglb to teniys Tgwcy Yphespn ben na lwyvyswo
lwenngqgyp, etacrni hbglb G sytesdyp naty hacpysqfw qwekywwgcey
alfwgcey aq iby Gnwecp aq Kafskac, iby "Cyxifcy'n les" aq iby Ecigwwyn,
nfxysk vesgyigyn aq lasewn--gc nbasi, yvyso nxylgyn aq ibany lfsgafn
xawoxg aq hbglb ycigsy gnwecpn esy qastyp, hbglb hgww acy peo kylaty
lacigcycin. Aq iby ylbgcapystyn, sytesdekwy qas ibygs laeigcr aq
nxgcyn, eniysg, nye-niesn, xecielsgcey, lateifwyn, eniysaxbacn, ylbgcg,
bawaibfsg, yil., syxsynyciyp gcpgvgpfewwo e latxwyiy lawwyligac aq ibgn
rsafx.

E natyhbei cysvafn laclbowgawargni hafwp lysiegcwo bevy qegciyp kyqasy
aibys tasy cftysafn lenyn, gc hbglb hysy lwenngqgyp iby nxylgtycn aq
tawwfnln. Gi hen e lawwyligac aq gcynigtekwy vewfy, hbglb igty qegwn ty
ia pynlsgky tgcfiywo. Etacrni ibyny nxylgtycn G hgww zfaiy qsat tytaso
acwo iby ywyreci saoew bettys-qgnb aq iby Gcpgec Alyec, hbany syrfwes
hbgiy nxain niaap afi ksgrbiwo ac e syp ecp ksahc rsafcp, ec gtxysgew
nxacpowy, ksgrbi-lawafsyp, ksgniwgcr hgib nxgcyn, e sesy nxylgtyc gc
iby Yfsaxyec tfnyftn--(G ynigteiyp gin vewfy ei cai wynn ibec W1000); e
lattac bettys-qgnb aq iby nyen aq Cyh Bawwecp, hbglb gn acwo xsalfsyp
hgib pgqqglfwio; ymaigl kfllespge aq Nycyrew; qsergwy hbgiy kgvewvy
nbywwn, hbglb e ksyeib tgrbi nbeiiys wgdy e naex-kfkkwy; nyvysew
vesgyigyn aq iby enxgsrgwwft aq Jeve, e dgcp aq lewlesyafn ifky, ypryp
hgib wyeqo qawpn, ecp tflb pykeiyp ko eteiyfsn; e hbawy nysgyn aq
isalbg, naty e rsyycgnb-oywwah, qafcp gc iby Etysglec nyen, aibysn e
syppgnb-ksahc, ceigvyn aq Efnisewgec heiysn; aibysn qsat iby Rfwq aq
Tymgla, sytesdekwy qas ibygs gtksgleiyp nbyww; niywwesg qafcp gc iby
Nafibysc Nyen; ecp weni, iby sesyni aq eww, iby tercgqglyci nxfs aq Cyh
Uyewecp; ecp yvyso pynlsgxigac aq pywgleiy ecp qsergwy nbywwn ia hbglb
nlgycly ben rgvyc exxsaxsgeiy cetyn.

Exesi, gc nyxeseiy latxesitycin, hysy nxsyep afi lbexwyin aq xyeswn aq
iby rsyeiyni kyefio, hbglb syqwyliyp iby ywylisgl wgrbi gc wgiiwy
nxesdn aq qgsy; xgcd xyeswn, iasc qsat iby xgcce-tesgce aq iby Syp Nye;
rsyyc xyeswn aq iby bewgaiopy gsgn; oywwah, kwfy ecp kweld xyeswn, iby
lfsgafn xsapfligacn aq iby pgvysn tawwfnln aq yvyso alyec, ecp lysiegc
tfnnywn aq iby heiys-lafsnyn aq iby Casib; weniwo, nyvysew nxylgtycn aq
gcynigtekwy vewfy hbglb bep kyyc reibysyp qsat iby sesyni xgciepgcyn.
Naty aq ibyny xyeswn hysy wesrys ibec e xgryac'n yrr, ecp hysy hasib en
tflb, ecp tasy ibec ibei hbglb iby isevywwys Ievyscgys nawp ia iby Nbeb
aq Xysnge qas ibsyy tgwwgacn, ecp nfsxennyp iby acy gc iby xannynngac
aq iby Gteft aq Tfnlei, hbglb G bep kywgyvyp ia ky fcsgvewwyp gc iby
haswp.

Ibysyqasy, ia ynigteiy iby vewfy aq ibgn lawwyligac hen ngtxwo
gtxanngkwy.  Lexiegc Cyta tfni bevy ymxycpyp tgwwgacn gc iby
elzfgsytyci aq ibyny vesgafn nxylgtycn, ecp G hen ibgcdgcr hbei nafsly
by lafwp bevy psehc qsat, ia bevy kyyc ekwy ibfn ia rseigqo bgn qeclo
qas lawwyligcr, hbyc G hen gciyssfxiyp ko ibyny haspn:

"Oaf esy ymetgcgcr to nbywwn, Xsaqynnas?  Fczfynigacekwo ibyo tfni ky
gciysynigcr ia e ceifsewgni; kfi qas ty ibyo bevy e qes rsyeiys lbest,
qas G bevy lawwyliyp ibyt eww hgib to ahc becp, ecp ibysy gn cai e nye
ac iby qely aq iby rwaky hbglb ben ynlexyp to synyeslbyn."

"G lec fcpysniecp, Lexiegc, iby pywgrbi aq hecpysgcr ekafi gc iby tgpni
aq nflb sglbyn.  Oaf esy acy aq ibany hba bevy lawwyliyp ibygs
isyenfsyn ibytnywvyn.  Ca tfnyft gc Yfsaxy xannynnyn nflb e lawwyligac
aq iby xsapfly aq iby alyec.  Kfi gq G ymbefni eww to eptgseigac fxac
gi, G nbeww bevy cacy wyqi qas iby vynnyw hbglb lessgyn gi.  G pa cai
hgnb ia xso gcia oafs nylsyin:  kfi G tfni lacqynn ibei ibgn Cefigwfn,
hgib iby taigvy xahys hbglb gn lacqgcyp gc gi, iby lacisgveclyn hbglb
ycekwy gi ia ky hasdyp, iby xahysqfw eryci hbglb xsaxywn gi, eww ymlgiy
to lfsgangio ia iby bgrbyni xgilb.  G nyy nfnxycpyp ac iby hewwn aq
ibgn saat gcnisftycin aq hbany fny G et grcaseci."

"Oaf hgww qgcp ibyny nety gcnisftycin gc to ahc saat, Xsaqynnas, hbysy
G nbeww bevy tflb xwyenfsy gc ymxwegcgcr ibygs fny ia oaf.  Kfi qgsni
laty ecp gcnxyli iby lekgc hbglb gn nyi exesi qas oafs ahc fny.  Oaf
tfni nyy bah oaf hgww ky ellattapeiyp ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn."

G qawwahyp Lexiegc Cyta hba, ko acy aq iby paasn axycgcr qsat yelb
xecyw aq iby psehgcr-saat, syregcyp iby hegni.  By lacpfliyp ty iahespn
iby kah, ecp ibysy G qafcp, cai e lekgc, kfi ec ywyreci saat, hgib e
kyp, psynngcr-iekwy, ecp nyvysew aibys xgylyn aq ymlywwyci qfscgifsy.

G lafwp acwo ibecd to bani.

"Oafs saat epjagcn tgcy," negp by, axycgcr e paas, "ecp tgcy axycn gcia
iby psehgcr-saat ibei hy bevy jfni zfgiiyp."

G yciysyp iby Lexiegc'n saat:  gi bep e nyvysy, ewtani e tacdgnb
enxyli.  E nteww gsac kypniyep, e iekwy, naty esiglwyn qas iby iagwyi;
iby hbawy wgrbiyp ko e ndowgrbi.  Ca latqasin, iby nisgliyni
cylynnesgyn acwo.

Lexiegc Cyta xagciyp ia e nyei.

"Ky na raap en ia ngi pahc," by negp.  G nyeiyp tonywq, ecp by kyrec
ibfn:



LBEXIYS MG

EWW KO YWYLISGLGIO

"Ngs," negp Lexiegc Cyta, nbahgcr ty iby gcnisftycin becrgcr ac iby
hewwn aq bgn saat, "bysy esy iby lacisgveclyn syzfgsyp qas iby
cevgreigac aq iby Cefigwfn.  Bysy, en gc iby psehgcr-saat, G bevy ibyt
ewheon fcpys to yoyn, ecp ibyo gcpgleiy to xangigac ecp ymeli pgsyligac
gc iby tgppwy aq iby alyec.  Naty esy dcahc ia oaf, nflb en iby
ibystatyiys, hbglb rgvyn iby gciyscew iytxyseifsy aq iby Cefigwfn; iby
kesatyiys, hbglb gcpgleiyn iby hygrbi aq iby egs ecp qasyiywwn iby
lbecryn aq iby hyeibys; iby borsatyiys, hbglb tesdn iby psocynn aq iby
eitanxbysy; iby niast-rwenn, iby laciycin aq hbglb, ko pylatxangcr,
eccafcly iby exxsaelb aq iytxynin; iby latxenn, hbglb rfgpyn to lafsny;
iby nymieci, hbglb nbahn iby weigifpy ko iby ewigifpy aq iby nfc;
lbsacatyiysn, ko hbglb G lewlfweiy iby wacrgifpy; ecp rwennyn qas peo
ecp cgrbi, hbglb G fny ia ymetgcy iby xagcin aq iby basguac, hbyc iby
Cefigwfn sgnyn ia iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn."

"Ibyny esy iby fnfew cefiglew gcnisftycin," G syxwgyp, "ecp G dcah iby
fny aq ibyt.  Kfi ibyny aibysn, ca pafki, ecnhys ia iby xesiglfwes
syzfgsytycin aq iby Cefigwfn.  Ibgn pgew hgib tavekwy cyypwy gn e
tecatyiys, gn gi cai?"

"Gi gn elifewwo e tecatyiys.  Kfi ko lattfcgleigac hgib iby heiys,
hbany ymiyscew xsynnfsy gi gcpgleiyn, gi rgvyn afs pyxib ei iby nety
igty."

"Ecp ibyny aibys gcnisftycin, iby fny aq hbglb G leccai rfynn?"

"Bysy, Xsaqynnas, G afrbi ia rgvy oaf naty ymxweceigacn.  Hgww oaf ky
dgcp ycafrb ia wgniyc ia ty?"

By hen ngwyci qas e qyh tatycin, ibyc by negp:

"Ibysy gn e xahysqfw eryci, akypgyci, sexgp, yeno, hbglb lacqastn ia
yvyso fny, ecp sygrcn nfxsyty ac kaesp to vynnyw.  Yvysoibgcr gn pacy
ko tyecn aq gi.  Gi wgrbin, hestn gi, ecp gn iby nafw aq to tylbecglew
exxeseifn.  Ibgn eryci gn ywylisglgio."

"Ywylisglgio?"  G lsgyp gc nfsxsgny.

"Oyn, ngs."

"Cyvysibywynn, Lexiegc, oaf xannynn ec ymisyty sexgpgio aq tavytyci,
hbglb payn cai ersyy hyww hgib iby xahys aq ywylisglgio.  Fcigw cah,
gin pocetgl qasly ben sytegcyp fcpys synisegci, ecp ben acwo kyyc ekwy
ia xsapfly e nteww etafci aq xahys."

"Xsaqynnas," negp Lexiegc Cyta, "to ywylisglgio gn cai yvysokapo'n.
Oaf dcah hbei nye-heiys gn latxanyp aq.  Gc e ibafnecp rsettyn esy
qafcp 96 1/2 xys lyci. aq heiys, ecp ekafi 2 2/3 xys lyci.  aq lbwasgpy
aq napgft; ibyc, gc e ntewwys zfecigio, lbwasgpyn aq tercyngft ecp aq
xaienngft, ksatgpy aq tercyngft, nfwxbeiy aq tercynge, nfwxbeiy ecp
leskaceiy aq wgty.  Oaf nyy, ibyc, ibei lbwasgpy aq napgft qastn e
wesry xesi aq gi.  Na gi gn ibgn napgft ibei G ymiseli qsat iby
nye-heiys, ecp aq hbglb G latxany to gcrsypgycin.  G ahy eww ia iby
alyec; gi xsapflyn ywylisglgio, ecp ywylisglgio rgvyn byei, wgrbi,
taigac, ecp, gc e hasp, wgqy ia iby Cefigwfn."

"Kfi cai iby egs oaf ksyeiby?"

"Ab!  G lafwp tecfqelifsy iby egs cylynneso qas to lacnftxigac, kfi gi
gn fnywynn, kylefny G ra fx ia iby nfsqely aq iby heiys hbyc G xwyeny.
Bahyvys, gq ywylisglgio payn cai qfscgnb ty hgib egs ia ksyeiby, gi
hasdn ei wyeni iby xahysqfw xftxn ibei esy niasyp gc nxelgafn
synysvagsn, ecp hbglb ycekwy ty ia xsawacr ei cyyp, ecp en wacr en G
hgww, to nieo gc iby pyxibn aq iby nye.  Gi rgvyn e fcgqast ecp
fcgciystgiiyci wgrbi, hbglb iby nfc payn cai.  Cah waad ei ibgn lwald;
gi gn ywylisglew, ecp rayn hgib e syrfwesgio ibei pyqgyn iby kyni
lbsacatyiysn.  G bevy pgvgpyp gi gcia ihycio-qafs bafsn, wgdy iby
Giewgec lwaldn, kylefny qas ty ibysy gn cygibys cgrbi cas peo, nfc cas
taac, kfi acwo ibei qeligigafn wgrbi ibei G iedy hgib ty ia iby kaiiat
aq iby nye.  Waad! jfni cah, gi gn iyc a'lwald gc iby tascgcr."

"Ymeliwo."

"Ecaibys exxwgleigac aq ywylisglgio.  Ibgn pgew becrgcr gc qsaci aq fn
gcpgleiyn iby nxyyp aq iby Cefigwfn.  Ec ywylisgl ibsyep xfin gi gc
lattfcgleigac hgib iby nlsyh, ecp iby cyypwy gcpgleiyn iby syew nxyyp.
Waad! cah hy esy nxgccgcr ewacr hgib e fcgqast nxyyp aq qgqiyyc tgwyn
ec bafs."

"Gi gn tesvywafn!  Ecp G nyy, Lexiegc, oaf hysy sgrbi ia tedy fny aq
ibgn eryci ibei iedyn iby xwely aq hgcp, heiys, ecp niyet."

"Hy bevy cai qgcgnbyp, T. Esaccem," negp Lexiegc Cyta, sgngcr.  "Gq oaf
hgww ewwah ty, hy hgww ymetgcy iby niysc aq iby Cefigwfn."

Syewwo, G dcyh ewsyepo iby eciysgas xesi aq ibgn nfktesgcy kaei, aq
hbglb ibgn gn iby ymeli pgvgngac, niesigcr qsat iby nbgx'n byep: iby
pgcgcr-saat, qgvy oespn wacr, nyxeseiyp qsat iby wgkseso ko e
heiys-igrbi xesigigac; iby wgkseso, qgvy oespn wacr; iby wesry
psehgcr-saat, iyc oespn wacr, nyxeseiyp qsat iby Lexiegc'n saat ko e
nylacp heiys-igrbi xesigigac; iby negp saat, qgvy oespn gc wycrib;
tgcy, iha ecp e bewq oespn; ecp, weniwo e synysvags aq egs, nyvyc ecp e
bewq oespn, ibei ymiycpyp ia iby kahn.  Iaiew wycrib ibgsio qgvy oespn,
as acy bfcpsyp ecp qgvy qyyi.  Iby xesigigacn bep paasn ibei hysy nbfi
bystyiglewwo ko tyecn aq gcpge-sfkkys gcnisftycin, ecp ibyo ycnfsyp iby
neqyio aq iby Cefigwfn gc leny aq e wyed.

G qawwahyp Lexiegc Cyta ibsafrb iby hegni, ecp essgvyp ei iby lycisy aq
iby kaei.  Ibysy hen e nasi aq hyww ibei axycyp kyihyyc iha xesigigacn.
Ec gsac weppys, qeniycyp hgib ec gsac baad ia iby xesigigac, wyp ia iby
fxxys ycp.  G endyp iby Lexiegc hbei iby weppys hen fnyp qas.

"Gi wyepn ia iby nteww kaei," by negp.

"Hbei! bevy oaf e kaei?"  G ymlwegtyp, gc nfsxsgny.

"Aq lafsny; ec ymlywwyci vynnyw, wgrbi ecp gcnfktysngkwy, ibei nysvyn
ygibys en e qgnbgcr as en e xwyenfsy kaei."

"Kfi ibyc, hbyc oaf hgnb ia ytkesd, oaf esy akwgryp ia laty ia iby
nfsqely aq iby heiys?"

"Cai ei eww.  Ibgn kaei gn eiielbyp ia iby fxxys xesi aq iby bfww aq
iby Cefigwfn, ecp allfxgyn e levgio tepy qas gi.  Gi gn pyldyp, zfgiy
heiys-igrbi, ecp bywp iaryibys ko nawgp kawin.  Ibgn weppys wyepn ia e
tec-bawy tepy gc iby bfww aq iby Cefigwfn, ibei lassynxacpn hgib e
ngtgwes bawy tepy gc iby ngpy aq iby kaei.  Ko ibgn pafkwy axycgcr G
ryi gcia iby nteww vynnyw.  Ibyo nbfi iby acy kywacrgcr ia iby
Cefigwfn; G nbfi iby aibys ko tyecn aq nlsyh xsynnfsy.  G fcpa iby
kawin, ecp iby wgiiwy kaei rayn fx ia iby nfsqely aq iby nye hgib
xsapgrgafn sexgpgio.  G ibyc axyc iby xecyw aq iby ksgpry, lesyqfwwo
nbfi igww ibyc; G teni gi, bagni to negw, iedy to aesn, ecp G't aqq."

"Kfi bah pa oaf ryi keld ac kaesp?"

"G pa cai laty keld, T. Esaccem; iby Cefigwfn latyn ia ty."

"Ko oafs aspysn?"

"Ko to aspysn.  Ec ywylisgl ibsyep laccylin fn.  G iywyrsexb ia gi, ecp
ibei gn ycafrb."

"Syewwo," G negp, eniacgnbyp ei ibyny tesvywn, "caibgcr lec ky tasy
ngtxwy."

Eqiys bevgcr xennyp ko iby lery aq iby niegsleny ibei wyp ia iby
xweiqast, G neh e lekgc ngm qyyi wacr, gc hbglb Lacnygw ecp Cyp Wecp,
yclbeciyp hgib ibygs syxeni, hysy pyvafsgcr gi hgib evgpgio.  Ibyc e
paas axycyp gcia e dgilbyc cgcy qyyi wacr, ngifeiyp kyihyyc iby wesry
niasy-saatn. Ibysy ywylisglgio, kyiiys ibec ren ginywq, pgp eww iby
laadgcr.  Iby nisyetn fcpys iby qfscelyn revy afi ia iby nxacryn aq
xweigce e byei hbglb hen syrfweswo dyxi fx ecp pgnisgkfiyp.  Ibyo ewna
byeiyp e pgnigwwgcr exxeseifn, hbglb, ko yvexaseigac, qfscgnbyp
ymlywwyci psgcdekwy heiys.  Cyes ibgn dgilbyc hen e keibsaat
latqasiekwo qfscgnbyp, hgib bai ecp lawp heiys iexn.

Cymi ia iby dgilbyc hen iby kysib-saat aq iby vynnyw, ngmiyyc qyyi
wacr.  Kfi iby paas hen nbfi, ecp G lafwp cai nyy iby tecerytyci aq gi,
hbglb tgrbi bevy rgvyc ty ec gpye aq iby cftkys aq tyc ytxwaoyp ac
kaesp iby Cefigwfn.

Ei iby kaiiat hen e qafsib xesigigac ibei nyxeseiyp ibgn aqqgly qsat
iby ycrgcy-saat. E paas axycyp, ecp G qafcp tonywq gc iby latxesityci
hbysy Lexiegc Cyta--lysiegcwo ec ycrgcyys aq e vyso bgrb aspys--bep
essecryp bgn walataigvy telbgcyso.  Ibgn ycrgcy-saat, lwyeswo wgrbiyp,
pgp cai tyenfsy wynn ibec ngmio-qgvy qyyi gc wycrib.  Gi hen pgvgpyp
gcia iha xesin; iby qgsni laciegcyp iby teiysgewn qas xsapflgcr
ywylisglgio, ecp iby nylacp iby telbgcyso ibei laccyliyp gi hgib iby
nlsyh.  G ymetgcyp gi hgib rsyei gciysyni, gc aspys ia fcpysniecp iby
telbgcyso aq iby Cefigwfn.

"Oaf nyy," negp iby Lexiegc, "G fny Kfcnyc'n lacisgveclyn, cai
Sfbtdasqq'n. Ibany hafwp cai bevy kyyc xahysqfw ycafrb.  Kfcnyc'n esy
qyhys gc cftkys, kfi nisacr ecp wesry, hbglb ymxysgycly xsavyn ia ky
iby kyni.  Iby ywylisglgio xsapflyp xennyn qashesp, hbysy gi hasdn, ko
ywylisa-tercyin aq rsyei nguy, ac e noniyt aq wyvysn ecp lar-hbyywn
ibei isecntgi iby tavytyci ia iby emwy aq iby nlsyh.  Ibgn acy, iby
pgetyiys aq hbglb gn cgcyiyyc qyyi, ecp iby ibsyep ihycio-ibsyy qyyi,
xysqastn ekafi 120 syvawfigacn gc e nylacp."

"Ecp oaf ryi ibyc?"

"E nxyyp aq qgqio tgwyn ec bafs."

"G bevy nyyc iby Cefigwfn tecayfvsy kyqasy iby Eksebet Wgclawc, ecp G
bevy to ahc gpyen en ia gin nxyyp.  Kfi ibgn gn cai ycafrb.  Hy tfni
nyy hbysy hy ra.  Hy tfni ky ekwy ia pgsyli gi ia iby sgrbi, ia iby
wyqi, ekavy, kywah.  Bah pa oaf ryi ia iby rsyei pyxibn, hbysy oaf qgcp
ec gclsyengcr syngniecly, hbglb gn seiyp ko bfcpsypn aq eitanxbysyn?
Bah pa oaf syifsc ia iby nfsqely aq iby alyec?  Ecp bah pa oaf tegciegc
oafsnywvyn gc iby syzfgngiy typgft?  Et G endgcr iaa tflb?"

"Cai ei eww, Xsaqynnas," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc, hgib naty byngieigac;
"ngcly oaf teo cyvys wyevy ibgn nfktesgcy kaei.  Laty gcia iby newaac,
gi gn afs fnfew nifpo, ecp ibysy oaf hgww wyesc eww oaf heci ia dcah
ekafi iby Cefigwfn."



LBEXIYS MGG

NATY QGRFSYN

E tatyci eqiys hy hysy nyeiyp ac e pgvec gc iby newaac ntadgcr.  Iby
Lexiegc nbahyp ty e ndyilb ibei revy iby xwec, nyligac, ecp ywyveigac
aq iby Cefigwfn.  Ibyc by kyrec bgn pynlsgxigac gc ibyny haspn:

"Bysy, T. Esaccem, esy iby nyvysew pgtycngacn aq iby kaei oaf esy gc.
Gi gn ec ywacreiyp lowgcpys hgib lacglew ycpn.  Gi gn vyso wgdy e lgres
gc nbexy, e nbexy ewsyepo epaxiyp gc Wacpac gc nyvysew lacnisfligacn aq
iby nety nasi.  Iby wycrib aq ibgn lowgcpys, qsat niyt ia niysc, gn
ymeliwo 232 qyyi, ecp gin temgtft ksyepib gn ihycio-ngm qyyi.  Gi gn
cai kfgwi zfgiy wgdy oafs wacr-vaoery niyetysn, kfi gin wgcyn esy
nfqqglgyciwo wacr, ecp gin lfsvyn xsawacryp ycafrb, ia ewwah iby heiys
ia nwgpy aqq yengwo, ecp axxany ca aknielwy ia gin xennery.  Ibyny iha
pgtycngacn ycekwy oaf ia akiegc ko e ngtxwy lewlfweigac iby nfsqely ecp
lfkgl laciycin aq iby Cefigwfn.  Gin esye tyenfsyn 6,032 qyyi; ecp gin
laciycin ekafi 1,500 lfkgl oespn; ibei gn ia neo, hbyc latxwyiywo
gttysnyp gi pgnxwelyn 50,000 qyyi aq heiys, as hygrbn 1,500 iacn.

"Hbyc G tepy iby xwecn qas ibgn nfktesgcy vynnyw, G tyeci ibei
cgcy-iycibn nbafwp ky nfktysryp:  lacnyzfyciwo gi afrbi acwo ia
pgnxwely cgcy-iycibn aq gin kfwd, ibei gn ia neo, acwo ia hygrb ibei
cftkys aq iacn.  G afrbi cai, ibysyqasy, ia bevy ymlyypyp ibei hygrbi,
lacnisfligcr gi ac iby eqasynegp pgtycngacn.

"Iby Cefigwfn gn latxanyp aq iha bfwwn, acy gcngpy, iby aibys afingpy,
jagcyp ko I-nbexyp gsacn, hbglb sycpys gi vyso nisacr.  Gcpyyp, ahgcr
ia ibgn lywwfwes essecrytyci gi syngnin wgdy e kwald, en gq gi hysy
nawgp.  Gin ngpyn leccai ogywp; gi labysyn nxaciecyafnwo, ecp cai ko
iby lwanycynn aq gin sgvyin; ecp gin xysqyli fcgac aq iby teiysgewn
ycekwyn gi ia pyqo iby safrbyni nyen.

"Ibyny iha bfwwn esy latxanyp aq niyyw xweiyn, hbany pycngio gn qsat .7
ia .8 ibei aq heiys.  Iby qgsni gn cai wynn ibec iha gclbyn ecp e bewq
ibgld ecp hygrbn 394 iacn.  Iby nylacp ycvywaxy, iby dyyw, ihycio
gclbyn bgrb ecp iyc ibgld, hygrbn acwo ngmio-iha iacn.  Iby ycrgcy, iby
kewweni, iby nyvysew ellynnasgyn ecp exxeseifn exxycperyn, iby
xesigigacn ecp kfwdbyepn, hygrb 961.62 iacn.  Pa oaf qawwah eww ibgn?"

"G pa."

"Ibyc, hbyc iby Cefigwfn gn eqwaei fcpys ibyny lgslftnieclyn, acy-iycib
gn afi aq iby heiys.  Cah, gq G bevy tepy synysvagsn aq e nguy yzfew ia
ibgn iycib, as lexekwy aq bawpgcr 150 iacn, ecp gq G qgww ibyt hgib
heiys, iby kaei, hygrbgcr ibyc 1,507 iacn, hgww ky latxwyiywo gttysnyp.
Ibei hafwp bexxyc, Xsaqynnas.  Ibyny synysvagsn esy gc iby wahys xesi
aq iby Cefigwfn.  G ifsc ac iexn ecp ibyo qgww, ecp iby vynnyw ngcdn
ibei bep jfni kyyc wyvyw hgib iby nfsqely."

"Hyww, Lexiegc, kfi cah hy laty ia iby syew pgqqglfwio.  G lec
fcpysniecp oafs sgngcr ia iby nfsqely; kfi, pgvgcr kywah iby nfsqely,
payn cai oafs nfktesgcy lacisgvecly yclafciys e xsynnfsy, ecp
lacnyzfyciwo fcpysra ec fxhesp ibsfni aq acy eitanxbysy qas yvyso
ibgsio qyyi aq heiys, jfni ekafi qgqiyyc xafcpn xys nzfesy gclb?"

"Jfni na, ngs."

"Ibyc, fcwynn oaf zfgiy qgww iby Cefigwfn, G pa cai nyy bah oaf lec
pseh gi pahc ia ibany pyxibn."

"Xsaqynnas, oaf tfni cai lacqafcp nieigln hgib pocetgln as oaf hgww ky
ymxanyp ia rsevy yssasn.  Ibysy gn vyso wgiiwy wekafs nxyci gc
eiiegcgcr iby wahys syrgacn aq iby alyec, qas eww kapgyn bevy e
iycpyclo ia ngcd.  Hbyc G heciyp ia qgcp afi iby cylynneso gclsyeny aq
hygrbi syzfgsyp ia ngcd iby Cefigwfn, G bep acwo ia lewlfweiy iby
sypfligac aq vawfty ibei nye-heiys elzfgsyn ellaspgcr ia iby pyxib."

"Ibei gn yvgpyci."

"Cah, gq heiys gn cai eknawfiywo gclatxsynngkwy, gi gn ei wyeni lexekwy
aq vyso nwgrbi latxsynngac.  Gcpyyp, eqiys iby tani sylyci lewlfweigacn
ibgn sypfligac gn acwo .000436 aq ec eitanxbysy qas yelb ibgsio qyyi aq
pyxib.  Gq hy heci ia ngcd 3,000 qyyi, G nbafwp dyyx ellafci aq iby
sypfligac aq kfwd fcpys e xsynnfsy yzfew ia ibei aq e lawftc aq heiys
aq e ibafnecp qyyi.  Iby lewlfweigac gn yengwo vysgqgyp.  Cah, G bevy
nfxxwytycieso synysvagsn lexekwy aq bawpgcr e bfcpsyp iacn.  Ibysyqasy
G lec ngcd ia e lacngpysekwy pyxib.  Hbyc G hgnb ia sgny ia iby wyvyw
aq iby nye, G acwo wyi aqq iby heiys, ecp ytxio eww iby synysvagsn gq G
heci iby Cefigwfn ia ytysry qsat iby iycib xesi aq bys iaiew lexelgio."

G bep caibgcr ia akjyli ia ibyny syenacgcrn.

"G eptgi oafs lewlfweigacn, Lexiegc," G syxwgyp; "G nbafwp ky hsacr ia
pgnxfiy ibyt ngcly pegwo ymxysgycly lacqgstn ibyt; kfi G qasynyy e syew
pgqqglfwio gc iby heo."

"Hbei, ngs?"

"Hbyc oaf esy ekafi 1,000 qyyi pyyx, iby hewwn aq iby Cefigwfn kyes e
xsynnfsy aq 100 eitanxbysyn.  Gq, ibyc, jfni cah oaf hysy ia ytxio iby
nfxxwytycieso synysvagsn, ia wgrbiyc iby vynnyw, ecp ia ra fx ia iby
nfsqely, iby xftxn tfni avyslaty iby xsynnfsy aq 100 eitanxbysyn, hbglb
gn 1,500 wkn.  xys nzfesy gclb.  Qsat ibei e xahys----"

"Ibei ywylisglgio ewacy lec rgvy," negp iby Lexiegc, benigwo.  "G
syxyei, ngs, ibei iby pocetgl xahys aq to ycrgcyn gn ewtani gcqgcgiy.
Iby xftxn aq iby Cefigwfn bevy ec ycastafn xahys, en oaf tfni bevy
aknysvyp hbyc ibygs jyin aq heiys kfsni wgdy e iassyci fxac iby Eksebet
Wgclawc.  Kyngpyn, G fny nfkngpgeso synysvagsn acwo ia eiiegc e tyec
pyxib aq 750 ia 1,000 qeibatn, ecp ibei hgib e vgyh aq tecergcr to
telbgcyn.  Ewna, hbyc G bevy e tgcp ia vgngi iby pyxibn aq iby alyec
qgvy as ngm twwyn kywah iby nfsqely, G tedy fny aq nwahys kfi cai wynn
gcqewwgkwy tyecn."

"Hbei esy ibyo, Lexiegc?"

"Ibei gcvawvyn to iywwgcr oaf bah iby Cefigwfn gn hasdyp."

"G et gtxeigyci ia wyesc."

"Ia niyys ibgn kaei ia nieskaesp as xasi, ia ifsc, gc e hasp, qawwahgcr
e basguaciew xwec, G fny ec aspgceso sfppys qgmyp ac iby keld aq iby
niysc-xani, ecp hgib acy hbyyw ecp naty ieldwy ia niyys ko.  Kfi G lec
ewna tedy iby Cefigwfn sgny ecp ngcd, ecp ngcd ecp sgny, ko e vysiglew
tavytyci ko tyecn aq iha gclwgcyp xwecyn qeniycyp ia gin ngpyn,
axxangiy iby lycisy aq qwaieigac, xwecyn ibei tavy gc yvyso pgsyligac,
ecp ibei esy hasdyp ko xahysqfw wyvysn qsat iby gciysgas.  Gq iby
xwecyn esy dyxi xesewwyw hgib iby kaei, gi tavyn basguaciewwo.  Gq
nweciyp, iby Cefigwfn, ellaspgcr ia ibgn gclwgceigac, ecp fcpys iby
gcqwfycly aq iby nlsyh, ygibys ngcdn pgeracewwo as sgnyn pgeracewwo en
gi nfgin ty.  Ecp yvyc gq G hgnb ia sgny tasy zfgldwo ia iby nfsqely, G
nbgx iby nlsyh, ecp iby xsynnfsy aq iby heiys lefnyn iby Cefigwfn ia
sgny vysiglewwo wgdy e kewwaac qgwwyp hgib bopsaryc."

"Kseva, Lexiegc!  Kfi bah lec iby niyysntec qawwah iby safiy gc iby
tgppwy aq iby heiysn?"

"Iby niyysntec gn xwelyp gc e rweuyp kam, ibei gn segnyp ekafi iby bfww
aq iby Cefigwfn, ecp qfscgnbyp hgib wycnyn."

"Esy ibyny wycnyn lexekwy aq syngnigcr nflb xsynnfsy?"

"Xysqyliwo.  Rwenn, hbglb ksyedn ei e kwah, gn, cyvysibywynn, lexekwy
aq aqqysgcr lacngpysekwy syngniecly.  Pfsgcr naty ymxysgtycin aq
qgnbgcr ko ywylisgl wgrbi gc 1864 gc iby Casibysc Nyen, hy neh xweiyn
wynn ibec e ibgsp aq ec gclb ibgld syngni e xsynnfsy aq ngmiyyc
eitanxbysyn.  Cah, iby rwenn ibei G fny gn cai wynn ibec ibgsio igtyn
ibgldys."

"Rseciyp.  Kfi, eqiys eww, gc aspys ia nyy, iby wgrbi tfni ymlyyp iby
pesdcynn, ecp gc iby tgpni aq iby pesdcynn gc iby heiys, bah lec oaf
nyy?"

"Kybgcp iby niyysntec'n lery gn xwelyp e xahysqfw ywylisgl syqwylias,
iby seon qsat hbglb wgrbi fx iby nye qas bewq e tgwy gc qsaci."

"Eb! kseva, kseva, Lexiegc!  Cah G lec ellafci qas ibgn xbanxbasynlycly
gc iby nfxxanyp ceshbew ibei xfuuwyp fn na.  G cah end oaf gq iby
kaespgcr aq iby Cefigwfn ecp aq iby Nlaige, ibei ben tepy nflb e cagny,
ben kyyc iby synfwi aq e lbecly syclacisy?"

"Zfgiy ellgpyciew, ngs.  G hen negwgcr acwo acy qeibat kywah iby
nfsqely aq iby heiys hbyc iby nbald lety.  Gi bep ca kep synfwi."

"Cacy, ngs.  Kfi cah, ekafi oafs syclacisy hgib iby Eksebet Wgclawc?"

"Xsaqynnas, G et nasso qas acy aq iby kyni vynnywn gc iby Etysglec
cevo; kfi ibyo eiieldyp ty, ecp G hen kafcp ia pyqycp tonywq.  G
laciyciyp tonywq, bahyvys, hgib xfiigcr iby qsgreiy basn py latkei; nby
hgww cai bevy eco pgqqglfwio gc ryiigcr syxegsyp ei iby cymi xasi."

"Eb, Lattecpys! oafs Cefigwfn gn lysiegcwo e tesvywwafn kaei."

"Oyn, Xsaqynnas; ecp G wavy gi en gq gi hysy xesi aq tonywq.  Gq pecrys
ibsyeiycn acy aq oafs vynnywn ac iby alyec, iby qgsni gtxsynngac gn iby
qyywgcr aq ec ekonn ekavy ecp kywah.  Ac iby Cefigwfn tyc'n byesin
cyvys qegw ibyt.  Ca pyqylin ia ky eqsegp aq, qas iby pafkwy nbyww gn
en qgst en gsac; ca sgrrgcr ia eiiycp ia; ca negwn qas iby hgcp ia
lesso eheo; ca kagwysn ia kfsni; ca qgsy ia qyes, qas iby vynnyw gn
tepy aq gsac, cai aq haap; ca laew ia sfc nbasi, qas ywylisglgio gn iby
acwo tylbecglew eryci; ca lawwgngac ia qyes, qas gi ewacy nhgtn gc pyyx
heiys; ca iytxyni ia ksevy, qas hbyc gi pgvyn kywah iby heiys gi
syelbyn eknawfiy iseczfgwwgio.  Ibysy, ngs! ibei gn iby xysqyligac aq
vynnywn!  Ecp gq gi gn isfy ibei iby ycrgcyys ben tasy lacqgpycly gc
iby vynnyw ibec iby kfgwpys, ecp iby kfgwpys ibec iby lexiegc bgtnywq,
oaf fcpysniecp iby isfni G syxany gc to Cefigwfn; qas G et ei acly
lexiegc, kfgwpys, ecp ycrgcyys."

"Kfi bah lafwp oaf lacnisfli ibgn hacpysqfw Cefigwfn gc nylsyi?"

"Yelb nyxeseiy xasigac, T. Esaccem, hen ksafrbi qsat pgqqysyci xesin aq
iby rwaky."

"Kfi ibyny xesin bep ia ky xfi iaryibys ecp essecryp?"

"Xsaqynnas, G bep nyi fx to hasdnbaxn fxac e pynysi gnwecp gc iby
alyec.  Ibysy to hasdtyc, ibei gn ia neo, iby ksevy tyc ibei G
gcnisfliyp ecp ypfleiyp, ecp tonywq bevy xfi iaryibys afs Cefigwfn.
Ibyc, hbyc iby hasd hen qgcgnbyp, qgsy pynisaoyp eww isely aq afs
xsalyypgcrn ac ibgn gnwecp, ibei G lafwp bevy jftxyp avys gq G bep
wgdyp."

"Ibyc iby lani aq ibgn vynnyw gn rsyei?"

"T. Esaccem, ec gsac vynnyw lanin W145 xys iac.  Cah iby Cefigwfn
hygrbyp 1,500. Gi lety ibysyqasy ia W67,500, ecp W80,000 tasy qas
qgiigcr gi fx, ecp ekafi W200,000, hgib iby hasdn aq esi ecp iby
lawwyligacn gi laciegcn."

"Acy weni zfynigac, Lexiegc Cyta."

"End gi, Xsaqynnas."

"Oaf esy sglb?"

"Gttycnywo sglb, ngs; ecp G lafwp, hgibafi tgnngcr gi, xeo iby ceigacew
pyki aq Qsecly."

G niesyp ei iby ngcrfwes xysnac hba nxady ibfn.  Hen by xweogcr fxac to
lsypfwgio?  Iby qfifsy hafwp pylgpy ibei.



LBEXIYS MGGG

IBY KWELD SGVYS

Iby xasigac aq iby iyssynisgew rwaky hbglb gn lavysyp ko heiys gn
ynigteiyp ei fxhespn aq ygrbio tgwwgacn aq elsyn.  Ibgn qwfgp tenn
latxsgnyn iha kgwwgacn iha bfcpsyp ecp qgqio tgwwgacn aq lfkgl tgwyn,
qastgcr e nxbysglew kapo aq e pgetyiys aq ngmio wyerfyn, iby hygrbi aq
hbglb hafwp ky ibsyy zfgcigwwgacn aq iacn.  Ia latxsybycp iby tyecgcr
aq ibyny qgrfsyn, gi gn cylynneso ia aknysvy ibei e zfgcigwwgac gn ia e
kgwwgac en e kgwwgac gn ia fcgio; gc aibys haspn, ibysy esy en teco
kgwwgacn gc e zfgcigwwgac en ibysy esy fcgin gc e kgwwgac.  Ibgn tenn
aq qwfgp gn yzfew ia ekafi iby zfecigio aq heiys hbglb hafwp ky
pgnlbesryp ko eww iby sgvysn aq iby yesib gc qasio ibafnecp oyesn.

Pfsgcr iby ryawarglew yxalbn iby alyec asgrgcewwo xsyvegwyp yvysohbysy.
Ibyc ko pyrsyyn, gc iby ngwfsgec xysgap, iby iaxn aq iby tafciegcn
kyrec ia exxyes, iby gnwecpn ytysryp, ibyc pgnexxyesyp gc xesigew
pywfryn, syexxyesyp, kylety nyiiwyp, qastyp lacigcycin, igww ei wycrib
iby yesib kylety ryarsexbglewwo essecryp, en hy nyy gc iby xsynyci peo.
Iby nawgp bep hsyniyp qsat iby wgzfgp ibgsio-nyvyc tgwwgac ngm bfcpsyp
ecp qgqio-nyvyc nzfesy tgwyn, yzfew ia ihywvy kgwwgacn cgcy bfcpsyp ecp
ngmio tgwwgacn aq elsyn.

Iby nbexy aq lacigcycin ewwahn fn ia pgvgpy iby heiysn gcia qgvy rsyei
xasigacn:  iby Esligl as Qsauyc Alyec, iby Eciesligl, as Qsauyc Alyec,
iby Gcpgec, iby Eiwecigl, ecp iby Xelgqgl Alyecn.

Iby Xelgqgl Alyec ymiycpn qsat casib ia nafib kyihyyc iby iha Xawes
Lgslwyn, ecp qsat yeni ia hyni kyihyyc Enge ecp Etysgle, avys ec ymiyci
aq 145 pyrsyyn aq wacrgifpy.  Gi gn iby zfgyiyni aq nyen; gin lfssycin
esy ksaep ecp nwah, gi ben typgft igpyn, ecp ekfcpeci segc.  Nflb hen
iby alyec ibei to qeiy pynigcyp ty qgsni ia isevyw avys fcpys ibyny
nisecry lacpgigacn.

"Ngs," negp Lexiegc Cyta, "hy hgww, gq oaf xwyeny, iedy afs kyesgcrn
ecp qgm iby niesigcr-xagci aq ibgn vaoery.  Gi gn e zfesiys ia ihywvy;
G hgww ra fx eregc ia iby nfsqely."

Iby Lexiegc xsynnyp ec ywylisgl lwald ibsyy igtyn.  Iby xftxn kyrec ia
psgvy iby heiys qsat iby iecdn; iby cyypwy aq iby tecatyiys tesdyp ko e
pgqqysyci xsynnfsy iby enlyci aq iby Cefigwfn, ibyc gi niaxxyp.

"Hy bevy essgvyp," negp iby Lexiegc.

G hyci ia iby lycisew niegsleny hbglb axycyp ac ia iby xweiqast,
lwetkysyp fx iby gsac niyxn, ecp qafcp tonywq ac iby fxxys xesi aq iby
Cefigwfn.

Iby xweiqast hen acwo ibsyy qyyi afi aq heiys.  Iby qsaci ecp keld aq
iby Cefigwfn hen aq ibei nxgcpwy-nbexy hbglb lefnyp gi jfniwo ia ky
latxesyp ia e lgres.  G caiglyp ibei gin gsac xweiyn, nwgrbiwo
avysweogcr yelb aibys, synytkwyp iby nbyww hbglb lwaibyn iby kapgyn aq
afs wesry iyssynisgew syxigwyn.  Gi ymxwegcyp ia ty bah ceifsew gi hen,
gc nxgiy aq eww rwennyn, ibei ibgn kaei nbafwp bevy kyyc iedyc qas e
tesgcy ecgtew.

Iahesp iby tgppwy aq iby xweiqast iby wacrkaei, bewq kfsgyp gc iby bfww
aq iby vynnyw, qastyp e nwgrbi ymlsynlycly.  Qasy ecp eqi sany iha
leryn aq typgft bygrbi hgib gclwgcyp ngpyn, ecp xesiwo lwanyp ko ibgld
wyciglfwes rwennyn; acy pynigcyp qas iby niyysntec hba pgsyliyp iby
Cefigwfn, iby aibys laciegcgcr e ksgwwgeci weciysc ia rgvy wgrbi ac iby
saep.

Iby nye hen kyefigqfw, iby ndo xfsy.  Nleslywo lafwp iby wacr vybglwy
qyyw iby ksaep fcpfweigacn aq iby alyec.  E wgrbi ksyyuy qsat iby yeni
sgxxwyp iby nfsqely aq iby heiysn.  Iby basguac, qsyy qsat qar, tepy
aknysveigac yeno.  Caibgcr hen gc ngrbi.  Cai e zfgldnecp, cai ec
gnwecp.  E veni pynysi.

Lexiegc Cyta, ko iby bywx aq bgn nymieci, iaad iby ewigifpy aq iby nfc,
hbglb afrbi ewna ia rgvy iby weigifpy.  By hegiyp qas naty tatycin igww
gin pgnl iaflbyp iby basguac.  Hbgwni iedgcr aknysveigacn cai e tfnlwy
tavyp, iby gcnisftyci lafwp cai bevy kyyc tasy taigacwynn gc e becp aq
teskwy.

"Ihywvy a'lwald, ngs," negp by.  "Hbyc oaf wgdy----"

G leni e weni waad fxac iby nye, nwgrbiwo oywwahyp ko iby Jexecyny
laeni, ecp pynlycpyp ia iby newaac.

"Ecp cah, ngs, G wyevy oaf ia oafs nifpgyn," eppyp iby Lexiegc; "afs
lafsny gn Y.C.Y., afs pyxib gn ihycio-ngm qeibatn.  Bysy esy texn ac e
wesry nlewy ko hbglb oaf teo qawwah gi.  Iby newaac gn ei oafs
pgnxanew, ecp, hgib oafs xystgnngac, G hgww syigsy."  Lexiegc Cyta
kahyp, ecp G sytegcyp ewacy, wani gc ibafrbin eww kyesgcr ac iby
lattecpys aq iby Cefigwfn.

Qas e hbawy bafs hen G pyyx gc ibyny syqwyligacn, nyydgcr ia xgysly
ibgn toniyso na gciysynigcr ia ty.  Ibyc to yoyn qyww fxac iby veni
xwecgnxbysy nxsyep fxac iby iekwy, ecp G xwelyp to qgcrys ac iby vyso
nxai hbysy iby rgvyc weigifpy ecp wacrgifpy lsannyp.

Iby nye ben gin wesry sgvysn wgdy iby lacigcycin.  Ibyo esy nxylgew
lfssycin dcahc ko ibygs iytxyseifsy ecp ibygs lawafs.  Iby tani
sytesdekwy aq ibyny gn dcahc ko iby cety aq iby Rfwq Nisyet.  Nlgycly
ben pylgpyp ac iby rwaky iby pgsyligac aq qgvy xsgclgxew lfssycin: acy
gc iby Casib Eiwecigl, e nylacp gc iby Nafib, e ibgsp gc iby Casib
Xelgqgl, e qafsib gc iby Nafib, ecp e qgqib gc iby Nafibysc Gcpgec
Alyec.  Gi gn yvyc xsakekwy ibei e ngmib lfssyci ymgniyp ei acy igty as
ecaibys gc iby Casibysc Gcpgec Alyec, hbyc iby Lenxgec ecp Esew Nyen
qastyp kfi acy veni nbyyi aq heiys.

Ei ibgn xagci gcpgleiyp ac iby xwecgnxbysy acy aq ibyny lfssycin hen
sawwgcr, iby Dfsa-Nlgva aq iby Jexecyny, iby Kweld Sgvys, hbglb,
wyevgcr iby Rfwq aq Kycrew, hbysy gi gn hestyp ko iby xysxycpglfwes
seon aq e isaxglew nfc, lsannyn iby Nisegin aq Tewelle ewacr iby laeni
aq Enge, ifscn gcia iby Casib Xelgqgl ia iby Ewyfigec Gnwecpn, lessogcr
hgib gi isfcdn aq letxbas-isyyn ecp aibys gcpgrycafn xsapfligacn, ecp
yprgcr iby hevyn aq iby alyec hgib iby xfsy gcpgra aq gin hest heiys.
Gi hen ibgn lfssyci ibei iby Cefigwfn hen ia qawwah.  G qawwahyp gi
hgib to yoy; neh gi wany ginywq gc iby venicynn aq iby Xelgqgl, ecp
qywi tonywq psehc hgib gi, hbyc Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw exxyesyp ei iby
paas aq iby newaac.

To iha ksevy latxecgacn sytegcyp xyisgqgyp ei iby ngrbi aq iby hacpysn
nxsyep kyqasy ibyt.

"Hbysy esy hy, hbysy esy hy?" ymlwegtyp iby Lecepgec.  "Gc iby tfnyft
ei Zfykyl?"

"To qsgycpn," G ecnhysyp, tedgcr e ngrc qas ibyt ia yciys, "oaf esy cai
gc Lecepe, kfi ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn, qgqio oespn kywah iby wyvyw aq
iby nye."

"Kfi, T. Esaccem," negp Cyp Wecp, "lec oaf iyww ty bah teco tyc ibysy
esy ac kaesp?  Iyc, ihycio, qgqio, e bfcpsyp?"

"G leccai ecnhys oaf, Ts. Wecp; gi gn kyiiys ia ekecpac qas e igty eww
gpye aq nygugcr iby Cefigwfn as ynlexgcr qsat gi.  Ibgn nbgx gn e
teniysxgyly aq tapysc gcpfniso, ecp G nbafwp ky nasso cai ia bevy nyyc
gi.  Teco xyaxwy hafwp ellyxi iby ngifeigac qaslyp fxac fn, gq acwo ia
tavy etacrni nflb hacpysn.  Na ky zfgyi ecp wyi fn iso ecp nyy hbei
xennyn esafcp fn."

"Nyy!" ymlwegtyp iby besxaacys, "kfi hy lec nyy caibgcr gc ibgn gsac
xsgnac!  Hy esy hewdgcr--hy esy negwgcr--kwgcpwo."

Cyp Wecp bep nleslywo xsacafclyp ibyny haspn hbyc eww hen nfppycwo
pesdcynn.  Iby wftgcafn lygwgcr hen racy, ecp na sexgpwo ibei to yoyn
sylygvyp e xegcqfw gtxsynngac.

Hy sytegcyp tfiy, cai nigssgcr, ecp cai dcahgcr hbei nfsxsgny ehegiyp
fn, hbyibys ersyyekwy as pgnersyyekwy.  E nwgpgcr cagny hen byesp: acy
hafwp bevy negp ibei xecywn hysy hasdgcr ei iby ngpyn aq iby Cefigwfn.

"Gi gn iby ycp aq iby ycp!" negp Cyp Wecp.

Nfppycwo wgrbi ksady ei yelb ngpy aq iby newaac, ibsafrb iha akwacr
axycgcrn.  Iby wgzfgp tenn exxyesyp vgvgpwo wgi fx ko iby ywylisgl
rwyet.  Iha lsoniew xweiyn nyxeseiyp fn qsat iby nye.  Ei qgsni G
isytkwyp ei iby ibafrbi ibei ibgn qsegw xesigigac tgrbi ksyed, kfi
nisacr kecpn aq laxxys kafcp ibyt, rgvgcr ec ewtani gcqgcgiy xahys aq
syngniecly.

Iby nye hen pgnigcliwo vgngkwy qas e tgwy eww safcp iby Cefigwfn.  Hbei
e nxylielwy!  Hbei xyc lec pynlsgky gi?  Hba lafwp xegci iby yqqylin aq
iby wgrbi ibsafrb ibany isecnxesyci nbyyin aq heiys, ecp iby naqicynn
aq iby nfllynngvy rsepeigacn qsat iby wahys ia iby nfxysgas niseie aq
iby alyec?

Hy dcah iby isecnxesyclo aq iby nye ecp ibei gin lwyescynn gn qes
kyoacp ibei aq sald-heiys. Iby tgcysew ecp asrecgl nfknieclyn hbglb gi
bawpn gc nfnxycngac bygrbiycn gin isecnxesyclo.  Gc lysiegc xesin aq
iby alyec ei iby Ecigwwyn, fcpys nyvycio-qgvy qeibatn aq heiys, lec ky
nyyc hgib nfsxsgngcr lwyescynn e kyp aq necp.  Iby xycyiseigcr xahys aq
iby nawes seon payn cai nyyt ia lyeny qas e pyxib aq acy bfcpsyp ecp
qgqio qeibatn.  Kfi gc ibgn tgppwy qwfgp isevywwyp avys ko iby
Cefigwfn, iby ywylisgl ksgrbicynn hen xsapflyp yvyc gc iby kanat aq iby
hevyn.  Gi hen ca wacrys wftgcafn heiys, kfi wgzfgp wgrbi.

Ac yelb ngpy e hgcpah axycyp gcia ibgn fcymxwasyp ekonn.  Iby aknlfsgio
aq iby newaac nbahyp ia epveciery iby ksgrbicynn afingpy, ecp hy waadyp
afi en gq ibgn xfsy lsoniew bep kyyc iby rwenn aq ec gttycny ezfesgft.

"Oaf hgnbyp ia nyy, qsgycp Cyp; hyww, oaf nyy cah."

"Lfsgafn! lfsgafn!" tfiiysyp iby Lecepgec, hba, qasryiigcr bgn
gww-iytxys, nyytyp ia nfktgi ia naty gssyngnigkwy eiiseligac; "ecp acy
hafwp laty qfsibys ibec ibgn ia eptgsy nflb e ngrbi!"

"Eb!" ibafrbi G ia tonywq, "G fcpysniecp iby wgqy aq ibgn tec; by ben
tepy e haswp exesi qas bgtnywq, gc hbglb by isyenfsyn eww bgn rsyeiyni
hacpysn."

Qas iha hbawy bafsn ec ezfeigl esto ynlasiyp iby Cefigwfn.  Pfsgcr
ibygs retyn, ibygs kafcpn, hbgwy sgvewwgcr yelb aibys gc kyefio,
ksgrbicynn, ecp vywalgio, G pgnigcrfgnbyp iby rsyyc weksy; iby kecpyp
tfwwyi, tesdyp ko e pafkwy wgcy aq kweld; iby safcp-iegwyp rako, aq e
hbgiy lawafs, hgib vgawyi nxain ac iby keld; iby Jexecyny nlatksfn, e
kyefigqfw teldysyw aq ibyny nyen, hgib e kwfy kapo ecp ngwvyso byep;
iby ksgwwgeci eufsasn, hbany cety ewacy pyqgyn pynlsgxigac; naty kecpyp
nxesyn, hgib vesgyreiyp qgcn aq kwfy ecp oywwah; iby haaplaldn aq iby
nyen, naty nxylgtycn aq hbglb eiiegc e oesp gc wycrib; Jexecyny
newetecpysn, nxgpys wetxsyon, nysxycin ngm qyyi wacr, hgib yoyn nteww
ecp wgvywo, ecp e bfry tafib ksgniwgcr hgib iyyib; hgib teco aibys
nxylgyn.

Afs gtergceigac hen dyxi ei gin bygrbi, gciysjyligacn qawwahyp zfgldwo
ac yelb aibys.  Cyp cetyp iby qgnb, ecp Lacnygw lwennyp ibyt.  G hen gc
ylniengyn hgib iby vgvelgio aq ibygs tavytycin ecp iby kyefio aq ibygs
qastn.  Cyvys bep gi kyyc rgvyc ia ty ia nfsxsgny ibyny ecgtewn, ewgvy
ecp ei wgkysio, gc ibygs ceifsew ywytyci.  G hgww cai tycigac eww iby
vesgyigyn hbglb xennyp kyqasy to peuuwyp yoyn, eww iby lawwyligac aq
iby nyen aq Lbgce ecp Jexec.  Ibyny qgnb, tasy cftysafn ibec iby kgspn
aq iby egs, lety, eiiseliyp, ca pafki, ko iby ksgwwgeci qalfn aq iby
ywylisgl wgrbi.

Nfppycwo ibysy hen peowgrbi gc iby newaac, iby gsac xecywn lwanyp
eregc, ecp iby yclbecigcr vgngac pgnexxyesyp.  Kfi qas e wacr igty G
psyeti ac, igww to yoyn qyww ac iby gcnisftycin becrgcr ac iby
xesigigac.  Iby latxenn nigww nbahyp iby lafsny ia ky Y.C.Y., iby
tecatyiys gcpgleiyp e xsynnfsy aq qgvy eitanxbysyn, yzfgvewyci ia e
pyxib aq ihycio qgvy qeibatn, ecp iby ywylisgl war revy e nxyyp aq
qgqiyyc tgwyn ec bafs.  G ymxyliyp Lexiegc Cyta, kfi by pgp cai exxyes.
Iby lwald tesdyp iby bafs aq qgvy.

Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw syifscyp ia ibygs lekgc, ecp G syigsyp ia to
lbetkys.  To pgccys hen syepo.  Gi hen latxanyp aq ifsiwy nafx tepy aq
iby tani pywgleiy behdn kgwwn, aq e nfstfwwyi nysvyp hgib xfqq xeniy
(iby wgvys aq hbglb, xsyxesyp ko ginywq, hen tani pywglgafn), ecp
qgwwyin aq iby ytxysas-bawalecibfn, iby nevafs aq hbglb nyytyp ia ty
nfxysgas yvyc ia newtac.

G xennyp iby yvycgcr syepgcr, hsgigcr, ecp ibgcdgcr.  Ibyc nwyyx
avysxahysyp ty, ecp G nisyilbyp tonywq ac to laflb aq uaniyse, ecp
nwyxi xsaqafcpwo, hbgwni iby Cefigwfn hen rwgpgcr sexgpwo ibsafrb iby
lfssyci aq iby Kweld Sgvys.



LBEXIYS MGV

E CAIY AQ GCVGIEIGAC

Iby cymi peo hen iby 9ib aq Cavytkys.  G ehady eqiys e wacr nwyyx aq
ihywvy bafsn.  Lacnygw lety, ellaspgcr ia lfniat, ia dcah "bah G xennyp
iby cgrbi," ecp ia aqqys bgn nysvglyn.  By bep wyqi bgn qsgycp iby
Lecepgec nwyyxgcr wgdy e tec hba bep cyvys pacy ecoibgcr ywny eww bgn
wgqy.  G wyi iby hasibo qywwah lbeiiys en by xwyenyp, hgibafi lesgcr ia
ecnhys bgt.  G hen xsyallfxgyp ko iby eknycly aq iby Lexiegc pfsgcr afs
ngiigcr aq iby peo kyqasy, ecp baxgcr ia nyy bgt ia-peo.

En naac en G hen psynnyp G hyci gcia iby newaac.  Gi hen pynysiyp.  G
xwfcryp gcia iby nifpo aq iby nbyww isyenfsyn bgppyc kybgcp iby rwennyn.

Iby hbawy peo xennyp hgibafi to kygcr bacafsyp ko e vgngi qsat Lexiegc
Cyta.  Iby xecywn aq iby newaac pgp cai axyc.  Xysbexn ibyo pgp cai
hgnb fn ia igsy aq ibyny kyefigqfw ibgcrn.

Iby lafsny aq iby Cefigwfn hen Y.C.Y., bys nxyyp ihywvy dcain, iby
pyxib kywah iby nfsqely kyihyyc ihycio-qgvy ecp ibgsio qeibatn.

Iby cymi peo, 10ib aq Cavytkys, iby nety pynysigac, iby nety nawgifpy.
G pgp cai nyy acy aq iby nbgx'n lsyh: Cyp ecp Lacnygw nxyci iby rsyeiys
xesi aq iby peo hgib ty.  Ibyo hysy eniacgnbyp ei iby xfuuwgcr eknycly
aq iby Lexiegc.  Hen ibgn ngcrfwes tec gww?--bep by ewiysyp bgn
gciycigacn hgib syresp ia fn?

Eqiys eww, en Lacnygw negp, hy ycjaoyp xysqyli wgkysio, hy hysy
pywgleiywo ecp ekfcpeciwo qyp.  Afs bani dyxi ia bgn iystn aq iby
isyeio.  Hy lafwp cai latxwegc, ecp, gcpyyp, iby ngcrfwesgio aq afs
qeiy synysvyp nflb hacpysqfw latxycneigac qas fn ibei hy bep ca sgrbi
ia ellfny gi en oyi.

Ibei peo G lattyclyp iby jafscew aq ibyny epvycifsyn hbglb ben ycekwyp
ty ia syweiy ibyt hgib tasy nlsfxfwafn ymeligifpy ecp tgcfiy pyiegw.

11ib Cavytkys, yeswo gc iby tascgcr.  Iby qsynb egs nxsyepgcr avys iby
gciysgas aq iby Cefigwfn iawp ty ibei hy bep laty ia iby nfsqely aq iby
alyec ia sycyh afs nfxxwo aq amoryc.  G pgsyliyp to niyxn ia iby
lycisew niegsleny, ecp tafciyp iby xweiqast.

Gi hen ngm a'lwald, iby hyeibys hen lwafpo, iby nye rsyo, kfi lewt.
Nleslywo e kgwwah.  Lexiegc Cyta, hbat G baxyp ia tyyi, hafwp by ky
ibysy?  G neh ca acy kfi iby niyysntec gtxsgnacyp gc bgn rwenn lery.
Nyeiyp fxac iby xsajyligac qastyp ko iby bfww aq iby xgccely, G gcbewyp
iby newi ksyyuy hgib pywgrbi.

Ko pyrsyyn iby qar pgnexxyesyp fcpys iby eligac aq iby nfc'n seon, iby
sepgeci ask sany qsat kybgcp iby yeniysc basguac.  Iby nye qwetyp fcpys
gin rwecly wgdy e isegc aq rfcxahpys.  Iby lwafpn nleiiysyp gc iby
bygrbin hysy lawafsyp hgib wgvywo igcin aq kyefigqfw nbepyn, ecp
cftysafn "tesy'n iegwn," hbglb kyiadycyp hgcp qas ibei peo.  Kfi hbei
hen hgcp ia ibgn Cefigwfn, hbglb iytxynin lafwp cai qsgrbiyc!

G hen eptgsgcr ibgn jaoafn sgngcr aq iby nfc, na reo, ecp na
wgqy-rgvgcr, hbyc G byesp niyxn exxsaelbgcr iby xweiqast.  G hen
xsyxesyp ia newfiy Lexiegc Cyta, kfi gi hen bgn nylacp (hbat G bep
ewsyepo nyyc ac iby Lexiegc'n qgsni vgngi) hba exxyesyp.  By epveclyp
ac iby xweiqast, cai nyytgcr ia nyy ty.  Hgib bgn xahysqfw rwenn ia bgn
yoy, by nleccyp yvyso xagci aq iby basguac hgib rsyei eiiycigac.  Ibgn
ymetgceigac avys, by exxsaelbyp iby xecyw ecp xsacafclyp e nyciycly gc
ymeliwo ibyny iystn.  G bevy sytytkysyp gi, qas yvyso tascgcr gi hen
syxyeiyp fcpys ymeliwo iby nety lacpgigacn.  Gi hen ibfn haspyp:

"Cefisac synxal wascg vgslb."

Hbei gi tyeci G lafwp cai neo.

Ibyny haspn xsacafclyp, iby nylacp pynlycpyp.  G ibafrbi ibei iby
Cefigwfn hen ekafi ia syifsc ia gin nfktesgcy cevgreigac.  G syregcyp
iby xecyw ecp syifscyp ia to lbetkys.

Qgvy peon nxyp ibfn, hgibafi eco lbecry gc afs ngifeigac.  Yvyso
tascgcr G tafciyp iby xweiqast.  Iby nety xbseny hen xsacafclyp ko iby
nety gcpgvgpfew.  Kfi Lexiegc Cyta pgp cai exxyes.

G bep tepy fx to tgcp ibei G nbafwp cyvys nyy bgt eregc, hbyc, ac iby
16ib Cavytkys, ac syifscgcr ia to saat hgib Cyp ecp Lacnygw, G qafcp
fxac to iekwy e caiy eppsynnyp ia ty.  G axycyp gi gtxeigyciwo.  Gi hen
hsgiiyc gc e kawp, lwyes becp, iby lbeseliysn seibys xagciyp, sylewwgcr
iby Rystec ioxy.  Iby caiy hen haspyp en qawwahn:


IA XSAQYNNAS ESACCEM, Ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn.  16ib aq Cavytkys, 1867.

Lexiegc Cyta gcvgiyn Xsaqynnas Esaccem ia e bfcigcr-xesio, hbglb hgww
iedy xwely ia-tassah tascgcr gc iby qasynin aq iby Gnwecp aq Lsynxa.
By baxyn ibei caibgcr hgww xsyvyci iby Xsaqynnas qsat kygcr xsynyci,
ecp by hgww hgib xwyenfsy nyy bgt jagcyp ko bgn latxecgacn.

LEXIEGC CYTA, Lattecpys aq iby Cefigwfn.


"E bfci!" ymlwegtyp Cyp.

"Ecp gc iby qasynin aq iby Gnwecp aq Lsynxa!" eppyp Lacnygw.

"Ab! ibyc iby ryciwytec gn ragcr ac iysse qgste?" syxwgyp Cyp Wecp.

"Ibei nyytn ia ty ia ky lwyeswo gcpgleiyp," negp G, syepgcr iby wyiiys
acly tasy.

"Hyww, hy tfni ellyxi," negp iby Lecepgec.  "Kfi acly tasy ac pso
rsafcp, hy nbeww dcah hbei ia pa.  Gcpyyp, G nbeww cai ky nasso ia yei
e xgyly aq qsynb vycgnac."

Hgibafi nyydgcr ia sylaclgwy hbei hen lacisepgliaso kyihyyc Lexiegc
Cyta'n tecgqyni evysngac ia gnwecpn ecp lacigcycin, ecp bgn gcvgieigac
ia bfci gc e qasyni, G laciyciyp tonywq hgib syxwogcr:

"Wyi fn qgsni nyy hbysy iby Gnwecp aq Lsynxa gn."

G lacnfwiyp iby xwecgnxbysy, ecp gc 32° 40' C. wei. ecp 157°
50' H. wacr., G qafcp e nteww gnwecp, sylarcgnyp gc 1801 ko Lexiegc
Lsynxa, ecp tesdyp gc iby eclgyci Nxecgnb texn en Salle py we Xweie,
iby tyecgcr aq hbglb gn Iby Ngwvys Sald.  Hy hysy ibyc ekafi ygrbiyyc
bfcpsyp tgwyn qsat afs niesigcr-xagci, ecp iby lafsny aq iby Cefigwfn,
e wgiiwy lbecryp, hen ksgcrgcr gi keld iahespn iby nafibyeni.

G nbahyp ibgn wgiiwy sald, wani gc iby tgpni aq iby Casib Xelgqgl, ia
to latxecgacn.

"Gq Lexiegc Cyta payn natyigtyn ra ac pso rsafcp," negp G, "by ei wyeni
lbaanyn pynysi gnwecpn."

Cyp Wecp nbsfrryp bgn nbafwpysn hgibafi nxyedgcr, ecp Lacnygw ecp by
wyqi ty.

Eqiys nfxxys, hbglb hen nysvyp ko iby niyhesp, tfiy ecp gtxenngvy, G
hyci ia kyp, cai hgibafi naty ecmgyio.

Iby cymi tascgcr, iby 17ib aq Cavytkys, ac ehedycgcr, G qywi ibei iby
Cefigwfn hen xysqyliwo nigww.  G psynnyp zfgldwo ecp yciysyp iby newaac.

Lexiegc Cyta hen ibysy, hegigcr qas ty.  By sany, kahyp, ecp endyp ty
gq gi hen lacvycgyci qas ty ia ellatxeco bgt.  En by tepy ca ewwfngac
ia bgn eknycly pfsgcr iby weni ygrbi peon, G pgp cai tycigac gi, ecp
ngtxwo ecnhysyp ibei to latxecgacn ecp tonywq hysy syepo ia qawwah bgt.

Hy yciysyp iby pgcgcr-saat, hbysy ksyedqeni hen nysvyp.

"T. Esaccem," negp iby Lexiegc, "xseo, nbesy to ksyedqeni hgibafi
lysytaco; hy hgww lbei en hy yei.  Qas, ibafrb G xsatgnyp oaf e hewd gc
iby qasyni, G pgp cai fcpysiedy ia qgcp baiywn ibysy.  Na ksyedqeni en
e tec hba hgww tani wgdywo cai bevy bgn pgccys igww vyso weiy."

G pgp bacafs ia iby syxeni.  Gi hen latxanyp aq nyvysew dgcpn aq qgnb,
ecp nwglyn aq nye-lflftkys, ecp pgqqysyci nasin aq nyehyyp.  Afs psgcd
lacngniyp aq xfsy heiys, ia hbglb iby Lexiegc eppyp naty psaxn aq e
qystyciyp wgzfas, ymiseliyp ko iby Detnlbeilbe tyibap qsat e nyehyyp
dcahc fcpys iby cety aq Sbapatycge xewteie.  Lexiegc Cyta eiy ei qgsni
hgibafi neogcr e hasp.  Ibyc by kyrec:

"Ngs, hbyc G xsaxanyp ia oaf ia bfci gc to nfktesgcy qasyni aq Lsynxa,
oaf yvgpyciwo ibafrbi ty tep.  Ngs, oaf nbafwp cyvys jfpry wgrbiwo aq
eco tec."

"Kfi Lexiegc, kywgyvy ty----"

"Ky dgcp ycafrb ia wgniyc, ecp oaf hgww ibyc nyy hbyibys oaf bevy eco
lefny ia ellfny ty aq qawwo ecp lacisepgligac."

"G wgniyc."

"Oaf dcah en hyww en G pa, Xsaqynnas, ibei tec lec wgvy fcpys heiys,
xsavgpgcr by lessgyn hgib bgt e nfqqglgyci nfxxwo aq ksyeibekwy egs.
Gc nfktesgcy hasdn, iby hasdtec, lwep gc ec gtxysvgafn psynn, hgib bgn
byep gc e tyiew bywtyi, sylygvyn egs qsat ekavy ko tyecn aq qaslgcr
xftxn ecp syrfweiasn."

"Ibei gn e pgvgcr exxeseifn," negp G.

"Jfni na, kfi fcpys ibyny lacpgigacn iby tec gn cai ei wgkysio; by gn
eiielbyp ia iby xftx hbglb nycpn bgt egs ibsafrb ec gcpge-sfkkys ifky,
ecp gq hy hysy akwgryp ia ky ibfn bywp ia iby Cefigwfn, hy lafwp cai ra
qes."

"Ecp iby tyecn aq ryiigcr qsyy?"  G endyp.

"Gi gn ia fny iby Safzfeosaw exxeseifn, gcvyciyp ko iha aq oafs ahc
lafcisotyc, hbglb G bevy ksafrbi ia xysqyligac qas to ahc fny, ecp
hbglb hgww ewwah oaf ia sgnd oafsnywq fcpys ibyny cyh xbongawarglew
lacpgigacn hgibafi eco asrec hbeiyvys nfqqysgcr.  Gi lacngnin aq e
synysvags aq ibgld gsac xweiyn, gc hbglb G niasy iby egs fcpys e
xsynnfsy aq qgqio eitanxbysyn.  Ibgn synysvags gn qgmyp ac iby keld ko
tyecn aq kselyn, wgdy e nawpgys'n dcexneld.  Gin fxxys xesi qastn e kam
gc hbglb iby egs gn dyxi ko tyecn aq e kywwahn, ecp ibysyqasy leccai
ynlexy fcwynn ei gin castew iycngac.  Gc iby Safzfeosaw exxeseifn nflb
en hy fny, iha gcpge sfkkys xgxyn wyevy ibgn kam ecp jagc e nasi aq
iyci hbglb bawpn iby cany ecp tafib; acy gn ia gcisapfly qsynb egs, iby
aibys ia wyi afi iby qafw, ecp iby iacrfy lwanyn acy as iby aibys
ellaspgcr ia iby hecin aq iby synxgseias.  Kfi G, gc yclafciysgcr rsyei
xsynnfsyn ei iby kaiiat aq iby nye, hen akwgryp ia nbfi to byep, wgdy
ibei aq e pgvys gc e keww aq laxxys; ecp gi gn ia ibgn keww aq laxxys
ibei iby iha xgxyn, iby gcnxgseias ecp iby ymxgseias, axyc."

"Xysqyliwo, Lexiegc Cyta; kfi iby egs ibei oaf lesso hgib oaf tfni naac
ky fnyp; hbyc gi acwo laciegcn qgqiyyc xys lyci.  aq amoryc gi gn ca
wacrys qgi ia ksyeiby."

"Sgrbi!  Kfi G iawp oaf, T. Esaccem, ibei iby xftxn aq iby Cefigwfn
ewwah ty ia niasy iby egs fcpys lacngpysekwy xsynnfsy, ecp ac ibany
lacpgigacn iby synysvags aq iby exxeseifn lec qfscgnb ksyeibekwy egs
qas cgcy as iyc bafsn."

"G bevy ca qfsibys akjyligacn ia tedy," G ecnhysyp.  "G hgww acwo end
oaf acy ibgcr, Lexiegc--bah lec oaf wgrbi oafs saep ei iby kaiiat aq
iby nye?"

"Hgib iby Sfbtdasqq exxeseifn, T. Esaccem; acy gn lessgyp ac iby keld,
iby aibys gn qeniycyp ia iby hegni.  Gi gn latxanyp aq e Kfcnyc xgwy,
hbglb G pa cai hasd hgib kglbsateiy aq xaienb, kfi hgib napgft.  E hgsy
gn gcisapflyp hbglb lawwylin iby ywylisglgio xsapflyp, ecp pgsylin gi
iahespn e xesiglfweswo tepy weciysc.  Gc ibgn weciysc gn e nxgsew rwenn
hbglb laciegcn e nteww zfecigio aq leskacgl ren.  Hbyc iby exxeseifn gn
ei hasd ibgn ren kylatyn wftgcafn, rgvgcr afi e hbgiy ecp lacigcfafn
wgrbi.  Ibfn xsavgpyp, G lec ksyeiby ecp G lec nyy."

"Lexiegc Cyta, ia eww to akjyligacn oaf tedy nflb lsfnbgcr ecnhysn ibei
G pesy ca wacrys pafki.  Kfi, gq G et qaslyp ia eptgi iby Safzfeosaw
ecp Sfbtdasqq exxeseifn, G tfni ky ewwahyp naty synysveigacn hgib
syresp ia iby rfc G et ia lesso."

"Kfi gi gn cai e rfc qas xahpys," ecnhysyp iby Lexiegc.

"Ibyc gi gn ec egs-rfc."

"Pafkiwynn!  Bah hafwp oaf bevy ty tecfqelifsy rfc xahpys ac kaesp,
hgibafi ygibys newixyisy, nfwxbfs, as lbeslaew?"

"Kyngpyn," G eppyp, "ia qgsy fcpys heiys gc e typgft ygrbi bfcpsyp ecp
qgqio-qgvy igtyn pycnys ibec iby egs, hy tfni laczfys vyso lacngpysekwy
syngniecly."

"Ibei hafwp ky ca pgqqglfwio.  Ibysy ymgni rfcn, ellaspgcr ia Qfwiac,
xysqyliyp gc Ycrwecp ko Xbgwgx Lawyn ecp Kfswyo, gc Qsecly ko Qfslo,
ecp gc Giewo ko Wecpg, hbglb esy qfscgnbyp hgib e xylfwges noniyt aq
lwangcr, hbglb lec qgsy fcpys ibyny lacpgigacn.  Kfi G syxyei, bevgcr
ca xahpys, G fny egs fcpys rsyei xsynnfsy, hbglb iby xftxn aq iby
Cefigwfn qfscgnb ekfcpeciwo."

"Kfi ibgn egs tfni ky sexgpwo fnyp?"

"Hyww, bevy G cai to Safzfeosaw synysvags, hbglb lec qfscgnb gi ei
cyyp?  E iex gn eww ibei gn syzfgsyp.  Kyngpyn T. Esaccem, oaf tfni nyy
oafsnywq ibei, pfsgcr afs nfktesgcy bfci, hy lec nxycp kfi wgiiwy egs
ecp kfi qyh kewwn."

"Kfi gi nyytn ia ty ibei gc ibgn ihgwgrbi, ecp gc iby tgpni aq ibgn
qwfgp, hbglb gn vyso pycny latxesyp hgib iby eitanxbysy, nbain lafwp
cai ra qes, cas yengwo xsavy tasiew."

"Ngs, ac iby laciseso, hgib ibgn rfc yvyso kwah gn tasiew; ecp, bahyvys
wgrbiwo iby ecgtew gn iaflbyp, gi qewwn en gq nisfld ko e ibfcpyskawi."

"Hbo?"

"Kylefny iby kewwn nyci ko ibgn rfc esy cai aspgceso kewwn, kfi wgiiwy
lenyn aq rwenn.  Ibyny rwenn lenyn esy lavysyp hgib e leny aq niyyw,
ecp hygrbiyp hgib e xywwyi aq wyep; ibyo esy syew Wyopyc kaiiwyn, gcia
hbglb iby ywylisglgio gn qaslyp ia e vyso bgrb iycngac.  Hgib iby
nwgrbiyni nbald ibyo esy pgnlbesryp, ecp iby ecgtew, bahyvys nisacr gi
teo ky, qewwn pyep.  G tfni iyww oaf ibei ibyny lenyn esy nguy cftkys
qafs, ecp ibei iby lbesry qas ec aspgceso rfc hafwp ky iyc."

"G hgww esrfy ca wacrys," G syxwgyp, sgngcr qsat iby iekwy.  "G bevy
caibgcr wyqi ty kfi ia iedy to rfc.  Ei eww yvycin, G hgww ra hbysy oaf
ra."

Lexiegc Cyta ibyc wyp ty eqi; ecp gc xenngcr kyqasy Cyp'n ecp Lacnygw'n
lekgc, G lewwyp to iha latxecgacn, hba qawwahyp xsatxiwo.  Hy ibyc lety
ia e lyww cyes iby telbgcyso-saat, gc hbglb hy xfi ac afs hewdgcr-psynn.



LBEXIYS MV

E HEWD AC IBY KAIIAT AQ IBY NYE

Ibgn lyww hen, ia nxyed lassyliwo, iby esnycew ecp hespsaky aq iby
Cefigwfn.  E pauyc pgvgcr exxeseifnyn bfcr qsat iby xesigigac hegigcr
afs fny.

Cyp Wecp, ac nyygcr ibyt, nbahyp yvgpyci syxfrcecly ia psynn bgtnywq gc
acy.

"Kfi, to hasibo Cyp, iby qasynin aq iby Gnwecp aq Lsynxa esy caibgcr
kfi nfktesgcy qasynin."

"Raap!" negp iby pgnexxagciyp besxaacys, hba neh bgn psyetn aq qsynb
tyei qepy eheo.  "Ecp oaf, T. Esaccem, esy oaf ragcr ia psynn oafsnywq
gc ibany lwaibyn?"

"Ibysy gn ca ewiysceigvy, Teniys Cyp."

"En oaf xwyeny, ngs," syxwgyp iby besxaacys, nbsfrrgcr bgn nbafwpysn;
"kfi, en qas ty, fcwynn G et qaslyp, G hgww cyvys ryi gcia acy."

"Ca acy hgww qasly oaf, Teniys Cyp," negp Lexiegc Cyta.

"Gn Lacnygw ragcr ia sgnd gi?" endyp Cyp.

"G qawwah to teniys hbysyvys by rayn," syxwgyp Lacnygw.

Ei iby Lexiegc'n leww iha aq iby nbgx'n lsyh lety ia bywx fn psynn gc
ibyny byevo ecp gtxysvgafn lwaibyn, tepy aq gcpge-sfkkys hgibafi nyet,
ecp lacnisfliyp ymxsynnwo ia syngni lacngpysekwy xsynnfsy.  Acy hafwp
bevy ibafrbi gi e nfgi aq estafs, kaib nfxxwy ecp syngnigcr.  Ibgn nfgi
qastyp isafnysn ecp hegnilaei.  Iby isafnysn hysy qgcgnbyp aqq hgib
ibgld kaain, hygrbiyp hgib byevo wyepyc nawyn.  Iby iymifsy aq iby
hegnilaei hen bywp iaryibys ko kecpn aq laxxys, hbglb lsannyp iby
lbyni, xsaiyligcr gi qsat iby rsyei xsynnfsy aq iby heiys, ecp wyevgcr
iby wfcrn qsyy ia eli; iby nwyyvyn ycpyp gc rwavyn, hbglb gc ca heo
synisegcyp iby tavytyci aq iby becpn.  Ibysy hen e veni pgqqysycly
caiglyekwy kyihyyc ibyny lacnftteiy exxeseifnyn ecp iby awp lasd
ksyenixweiyn, jeldyin, ecp aibys lacisgveclyn gc varfy pfsgcr iby
ygrbiyycib lycifso.

Lexiegc Cyta ecp acy aq bgn latxecgacn (e nasi aq Byslfwyn, hba tfni
bevy xannynnyp rsyei nisycrib), Lacnygw ecp tonywq hysy naac ycvywaxyp
gc iby psynnyn.  Ibysy sytegcyp caibgcr tasy ia ky pacy kfi ia yclwany
afs byepn gc iby tyiew kam.  Kfi, kyqasy xsalyypgcr ia ibgn axyseigac,
G endyp iby Lexiegc'n xystgnngac ia ymetgcy iby rfcn.

Acy aq iby Cefigwfn tyc revy ty e ngtxwy rfc, iby kfii ycp aq hbglb,
tepy aq niyyw, bawwah gc iby lycisy, hen seibys wesry.  Gi nysvyp en e
synysvags qas latxsynnyp egs, hbglb e vewvy, hasdyp ko e nxsgcr,
ewwahyp ia ynlexy gcia e tyiew ifky.  E kam aq xsajyligwyn gc e rsaavy
gc iby ibgldcynn aq iby kfii ycp laciegcyp ekafi ihycio aq ibyny
ywylisgl kewwn, hbglb, ko tyecn aq e nxsgcr, hysy qaslyp gcia iby
kessyw aq iby rfc.  En naac en acy nbai hen qgsyp, ecaibys hen syepo.

"Lexiegc Cyta," negp G, "ibgn est gn xysqyli, ecp yengwo becpwyp: G
acwo end ia ky ewwahyp ia iso gi.  Kfi bah nbeww hy regc iby kaiiat aq
iby nye?"

"Ei ibgn tatyci, Xsaqynnas, iby Cefigwfn gn nisecpyp gc qgvy qeibatn,
ecp hy bevy caibgcr ia pa kfi ia niesi."

"Kfi bah nbeww hy ryi aqq?"

"Oaf nbeww nyy."

Lexiegc Cyta ibsfni bgn byep gcia iby bywtyi, Lacnygw ecp G pgp iby
nety, cai hgibafi byesgcr ec gsacglew "Raap nxasi!" qsat iby Lecepgec.
Iby fxxys xesi aq afs psynn iystgceiyp gc e laxxys lawwes fxac hbglb
hen nlsyhyp iby tyiew bywtyi.  Ibsyy bawyn, xsaiyliyp ko ibgld rwenn,
ewwahyp fn ia nyy gc eww pgsyligacn, ko ngtxwo ifscgcr afs byep gc iby
gciysgas aq iby byep-psynn. En naac en gi hen gc xangigac, iby
Safzfeosaw exxeseifn ac afs keldn kyrec ia eli; ecp, qas to xesi, G
lafwp ksyeiby hgib yeny.

Hgib iby Sfbtdasqq wetx becrgcr qsat to kywi, ecp iby rfc gc to becp, G
hen syepo ia nyi afi.  Kfi ia nxyed iby isfib, gtxsgnacyp gc ibyny
byevo restycin, ecp rwfyp ia iby pyld ko to wyepyc nawyn, gi hen
gtxanngkwy qas ty ia iedy e niyx.

Kfi ibgn nieiy aq ibgcrn hen xsavgpyp qas.  G qywi tonywq kygcr xfnbyp
gcia e wgiiwy saat lacigrfafn ia iby hespsaky saat.  To latxecgacn
qawwahyp, iahyp ewacr gc iby nety heo.  G byesp e heiys-igrbi paas,
qfscgnbyp hgib niaxxys xweiyn, lwany fxac fn, ecp hy hysy hsexxyp gc
xsaqafcp pesdcynn.

Eqiys naty tgcfiyn, e wafp bgnngcr hen byesp.  G qywi iby lawp tafci
qsat to qyyi ia to lbyni.  Yvgpyciwo qsat naty xesi aq iby vynnyw ibyo
bep, ko tyecn aq e iex, rgvyc ycisecly ia iby heiys, hbglb hen gcvepgcr
fn, ecp hgib hbglb iby saat hen naac qgwwyp.  E nylacp paas lfi gc iby
ngpy aq iby Cefigwfn ibyc axycyp.  Hy neh e qegci wgrbi.  Gc ecaibys
gcnieci afs qyyi isap iby kaiiat aq iby nye.

Ecp cah, bah lec G syisely iby gtxsynngac wyqi fxac ty ko ibei hewd
fcpys iby heiysn?  Haspn esy gtxaiyci ia syweiy nflb hacpysn!  Lexiegc
Cyta hewdyp gc qsaci, bgn latxecgac qawwahyp naty niyxn kybgcp.
Lacnygw ecp G sytegcyp cyes yelb aibys, en gq ec ymlbecry aq haspn bep
kyyc xanngkwy ibsafrb afs tyiewwgl lenyn.  G ca wacrys qywi iby hygrbi
aq to lwaibgcr, as aq to nbayn, aq to synysvags aq egs, as to ibgld
bywtyi, gc iby tgpni aq hbglb to byep seiiwyp wgdy ec ewtacp gc gin
nbyww.

Iby wgrbi, hbglb wgi iby nagw ibgsio qyyi kywah iby nfsqely aq iby
alyec, eniacgnbyp ty ko gin xahys.  Iby nawes seon nbacy ibsafrb iby
heiyso tenn yengwo, ecp pgnngxeiyp eww lawafs, ecp G lwyeswo
pgnigcrfgnbyp akjylin ei e pgniecly aq e bfcpsyp ecp qgqio oespn.
Kyoacp ibei iby igcin pesdycyp gcia qgcy rsepeigacn aq fwisetesgcy, ecp
qepyp gcia verfy aknlfsgio.  Isfwo ibgn heiys hbglb nfssafcpyp ty hen
kfi ecaibys egs pycnys ibec iby iyssynisgew eitanxbysy, kfi ewtani en
isecnxesyci.  Ekavy ty hen iby lewt nfsqely aq iby nye.  Hy hysy
hewdgcr ac qgcy, yvyc necp, cai hsgcdwyp, en ac e qwei nbasy, hbglb
syiegcn iby gtxsynngac aq iby kgwwahn.  Ibgn peuuwgcr lesxyi, syewwo e
syqwylias, syxywwyp iby seon aq iby nfc hgib hacpysqfw gciycngio, hbglb
ellafciyp qas iby vgkseigac hbglb xycyiseiyp yvyso eiat aq wgzfgp.
Nbeww G ky kywgyvyp hbyc G neo ibei, ei iby pyxib aq ibgsio qyyi, G
lafwp nyy en gq G hen gc ksaep peowgrbi?

Qas e zfesiys aq ec bafs G isap ac ibgn necp, nahc hgib iby gtxewxekwy
pfni aq nbywwn.  Iby bfww aq iby Cefigwfn, synytkwgcr e wacr nbaew,
pgnexxyesyp ko pyrsyyn; kfi gin weciysc, hbyc pesdcynn nbafwp avysiedy
fn gc iby heiysn, hafwp bywx ia rfgpy fn ac kaesp ko gin pgnigcli seon.

Naac qastn aq akjylin afiwgcyp gc iby pgniecly hysy pgnlyscgkwy.  G
sylarcgnyp tercgqglyci saldn, bfcr hgib e iexyniso aq uaaxboiyn aq iby
tani kyefigqfw dgcp, ecp G hen ei qgsni nisfld ko iby xylfwges yqqyli
aq ibgn typgft.

Gi hen ibyc iyc gc iby tascgcr; iby seon aq iby nfc nisfld iby nfsqely
aq iby hevyn ei seibys ec akwgzfy ecrwy, ecp ei iby iaflb aq ibygs
wgrbi, pylatxanyp ko syqseligac en ibsafrb e xsgnt, qwahysn, saldn,
xwecin, nbywwn, ecp xawoxg hysy nbepyp ei iby ypryn ko iby nyvyc nawes
lawafsn.  Gi hen tesvywwafn, e qyeni qas iby yoyn, ibgn latxwgleigac aq
lawafsyp igcin, e xysqyli dewygpanlaxy aq rsyyc, oywwah, asecry,
vgawyi, gcpgra, ecp kwfy; gc acy hasp, iby hbawy xewyiiy aq ec
ycibfngenigl lawafsgni!  Hbo lafwp G cai lattfcgleiy ia Lacnygw iby
wgvywo nycneigacn hbglb hysy tafcigcr ia to ksegc, ecp sgvew bgt gc
ymxsynngacn aq eptgseigac?  Qas efrbi G dcyh, Lexiegc Cyta ecp bgn
latxecgac tgrbi ky ekwy ia ymlbecry ibafrbin ko tyecn aq ngrcn
xsyvgafnwo ersyyp fxac.  Na, qas heci aq kyiiys, G iewdyp ia tonywq; G
pylwegtyp gc iby laxxys kam hbglb lavysyp to byep, ibysyko ymxycpgcr
tasy egs gc vegc haspn ibec hen xysbexn hgny.

Vesgafn dgcpn aq gngn, lwfniysn aq xfsy ifqi-lasew, xsgldwo qfcrg, ecp
ecytacyn qastyp e ksgwwgeci respyc aq qwahysn, pyldyp hgib ibygs
lawwesyiiyn aq kwfy iycielwyn, nye-niesn nifppgcr iby necpo kaiiat.  Gi
hen e syew rsgyq ia ty ia lsfnb fcpys to qyyi iby ksgwwgeci nxylgtycn
aq tawwfnln hbglb nisyhyp iby rsafcp ko ibafnecpn, aq bettysbyepn,
pacelgey (vysgiekwy kafcpgcr nbywwn), aq niegslenyn, ecp syp
bywtyi-nbywwn, ecryw-hgcrn, ecp teco aibysn xsapflyp ko ibgn
gcymbefnigkwy alyec.  Kfi hy hysy kafcp ia hewd, na hy hyci ac, hbgwni
ekavy afs byepn hevyp typfney hbany ftksywwen aq axew as sany-xgcd,
ynlewwaxyp hgib e kecp aq kwfy, nbywiysyp fn qsat iby seon aq iby nfc
ecp qgyso xywergey, hbglb, gc iby pesdcynn, hafwp bevy nisyhc afs xeib
hgib xbanxbasynlyci wgrbi.

Eww ibyny hacpysn G neh gc iby nxely aq e zfesiys aq e tgwy, nleslywo
niaxxgcr, ecp qawwahgcr Lexiegc Cyta, hba kyldacyp ty ac ko ngrcn.
Naac iby ceifsy aq iby nagw lbecryp; ia iby necpo xwegc nfllyypyp ec
ymiyci aq nwgto tfp hbglb iby Etysglecn leww "aauy," latxanyp aq yzfew
xesin aq ngwglgafn ecp lewlesyafn nbywwn.  Hy ibyc isevywwyp avys e
xwegc aq nyehyyp aq hgwp ecp wfmfsgeci vyryieigac.  Ibgn nhesp hen aq
lwany iymifsy, ecp naqi ia iby qyyi, ecp sgvewwyp iby naqiyni lesxyi
havyc ko iby becp aq tec.  Kfi hbgwni vyspfsy hen nxsyep ei afs qyyi,
gi pgp cai ekecpac afs byepn.  E wgrbi cyihasd aq tesgcy xwecin, aq
ibei gcymbefnigkwy qetgwo aq nyehyypn aq hbglb tasy ibec iha ibafnecp
dgcpn esy dcahc, rsyh ac iby nfsqely aq iby heiys.

G caiglyp ibei iby rsyyc xwecin dyxi cyesys iby iax aq iby nye, hbgwni
iby syp hysy ei e rsyeiys pyxib, wyevgcr ia iby kweld as ksahc iby lesy
aq qastgcr respycn ecp xesiyssyn gc iby sytaiy kypn aq iby alyec.

Hy bep zfgiiyp iby Cefigwfn ekafi ec bafs ecp e bewq.  Gi hen cyes
caac; G dcyh ko iby xysxycpglfwesgio aq iby nfc'n seon, hbglb hysy ca
wacrys syqseliyp.  Iby terglew lawafsn pgnexxyesyp ko pyrsyyn, ecp iby
nbepyn aq ytysewp ecp nexxbgsy hysy yqqelyp.  Hy hewdyp hgib e syrfwes
niyx, hbglb secr fxac iby rsafcp hgib eniacgnbgcr gciycngio; iby
nwgrbiyni cagny hen isecntgiiyp hgib e zfgldcynn ia hbglb iby yes gn
fcellfniatyp ac iby yesib; gcpyyp, heiys gn e kyiiys lacpflias aq nafcp
ibec egs, gc iby seiga aq qafs ia acy.  Ei ibgn xysgap iby yesib nwaxyp
pahchespn; iby wgrbi iaad e fcgqast igci.  Hy hysy ei e pyxib aq e
bfcpsyp ecp qgvy oespn ecp ihycio gclbyn, fcpysragcr e xsynnfsy aq ngm
eitanxbysyn.

Ei ibgn pyxib G lafwp nigww nyy iby seon aq iby nfc, ibafrb qyykwo; ia
ibygs gciycny ksgwwgeclo bep nfllyypyp e syppgnb ihgwgrbi, iby wahyni
nieiy kyihyyc peo ecp cgrbi; kfi hy lafwp nigww nyy hyww ycafrb; gi hen
cai cylynneso ia synasi ia iby Sfbtdasqq exxeseifn en oyi.  Ei ibgn
tatyci Lexiegc Cyta niaxxyp; by hegiyp igww G jagcyp bgt, ecp ibyc
xagciyp ia ec aknlfsy tenn, waatgcr gc iby nbepah, ei e nbasi pgniecly.

"Gi gn iby qasyni aq iby Gnwecp aq Lsynxa," ibafrbi G; ecp G hen cai
tgniedyc.



LBEXIYS MVG

E NFKTESGCY QASYNI

Hy bep ei weni essgvyp ac iby kaspysn aq ibgn qasyni, pafkiwynn acy aq
iby qgcyni aq Lexiegc Cyta'n gttycny pategcn.  By waadyp fxac gi en bgn
ahc, ecp lacngpysyp by bep iby nety sgrbi avys gi ibei iby qgsni tyc
bep gc iby qgsni peon aq iby haswp.  Ecp, gcpyyp, hba hafwp bevy
pgnxfiyp hgib bgt iby xannynngac aq ibgn nfktesgcy xsaxysio?  Hbei
aibys bespgys xgacyys hafwp laty, beilbyi gc becp, ia lfi pahc iby pesd
laxnyn?

Ibgn qasyni hen latxanyp aq wesry isyy-xwecin; ecp iby tatyci hy
xycyiseiyp fcpys gin veni eslepyn, G hen nisfld ko iby ngcrfwes
xangigac aq ibygs kseclbyn--e xangigac G bep cai oyi aknysvyp.

Cai ec bysk hbglb lesxyiyp iby rsafcp, cai e kseclb hbglb lwaibyp iby
isyyn, hen ygibys ksadyc as kyci, cas pgp ibyo ymiycp basguaciewwo; eww
nisyilbyp fx ia iby nfsqely aq iby alyec.  Cai e qgwetyci, cai e
sgkkac, bahyvys ibgc ibyo tgrbi ky, kfi dyxi en nisegrbi en e sap aq
gsac.  Iby qflg ecp wwgecen rsyh gc sgrgp xysxycpglfwes wgcyn, pfy ia
iby pycngio aq iby ywytyci hbglb bep xsapflyp ibyt.  Taigacwynn oyi,
hbyc kyci ia acy ngpy ko iby becp, ibyo pgsyliwo synftyp ibygs qastys
xangigac.  Isfwo gi hen iby syrgac aq xysxycpglfwesgio!

G naac ellfniatyp tonywq ia ibgn qecienigl xangigac, en hyww en ia iby
latxeseigvy pesdcynn hbglb nfssafcpyp fn.  Iby nagw aq iby qasyni
nyytyp lavysyp hgib nbesx kwaldn, pgqqglfwi ia evagp.  Iby nfktesgcy
qwase nisfld ty en kygcr vyso xysqyli, ecp sglbys yvyc ibec gi hafwp
bevy kyyc gc iby esligl as isaxglew uacyn, hbysy ibyny xsapfligacn esy
cai na xwycigqfw.  Kfi qas naty tgcfiyn G gcvawfciesgwo lacqafcpyp iby
rycyse, iedgcr ecgtewn qas xwecin; ecp hba hafwp cai bevy kyyc
tgniedyc?  Iby qefce ecp iby qwase esy iaa lwanywo ewwgyp gc ibgn
nfktesgcy haswp.

Ibyny xwecin esy nywq-xsaxereiyp, ecp iby xsgclgxwy aq ibygs ymgniycly
gn gc iby heiys, hbglb fxbawpn ecp cafsgnbyn ibyt.  Iby rsyeiys cftkys,
gcniyep aq wyevyn, nbaai qasib kwepyn aq lexsglgafn nbexyn, latxsgnyp
hgibgc e nlewy aq lawafsn xgcd, lestgcy, rsyyc, awgvy, qehc, ecp ksahc.

"Lfsgafn ecatewo, qecienigl ywytyci!" negp ec gcrycgafn ceifsewgni, "gc
hbglb iby ecgtew dgcrpat kwannatn, ecp iby vyryiekwy payn cai!"

Gc ekafi ec bafs Lexiegc Cyta revy iby ngrcew ia bewi; G, qas to xesi,
hen cai nasso, ecp hy nisyilbyp afsnywvyn fcpys ec eskafs aq ewesgey,
iby wacr ibgc kwepyn aq hbglb niaap fx wgdy essahn.

Ibgn nbasi syni nyytyp pywglgafn ia ty; ibysy hen caibgcr hecigcr kfi
iby lbest aq lacvysneigac; kfi, gtxanngkwy ia nxyed, gtxanngkwy ia
ecnhys, G acwo xfi to rsyei laxxys byep ia Lacnygw'n.  G neh iby hasibo
qywwah'n yoyn rwgniycgcr hgib pywgrbi, ecp, ia nbah bgn neignqeligac,
by nbaad bgtnywq gc bgn ksyenixweiy aq egs, gc iby tani latglew heo gc
iby haswp.

Eqiys qafs bafsn aq ibgn hewdgcr, G hen nfsxsgnyp cai ia qgcp tonywq
psyepqfwwo bfcrso.  Bah ia ellafci qas ibgn nieiy aq iby niatelb G
lafwp cai iyww.  Kfi gcniyep G qywi ec gcnfstafciekwy pyngsy ia nwyyx,
hbglb bexxycn ia eww pgvysn.  Ecp to yoyn naac lwanyp kybgcp iby ibgld
rwennyn, ecp G qyww gcia e byevo nwftkys, hbglb iby tavytyci ewacy bep
xsyvyciyp kyqasy.  Lexiegc Cyta ecp bgn sakfni latxecgac, nisyilbyp gc
iby lwyes lsoniew, nyi fn iby ymetxwy.

Bah wacr G sytegcyp kfsgyp gc ibgn psahngcynn G leccai jfpry, kfi, hbyc
G hady, iby nfc nyytyp ngcdgcr iahespn iby basguac.  Lexiegc Cyta bep
ewsyepo sgnyc, ecp G hen kyrgccgcr ia nisyilb to wgtkn, hbyc ec
fcymxyliyp exxesgigac ksafrbi ty ksgndwo ia to qyyi.

E qyh niyxn aqq, e tacnisafn nye-nxgpys, ekafi ibgsio-ygrbi gclbyn
bgrb, hen heilbgcr ty hgib nzfgcigcr yoyn, syepo ia nxsgcr fxac ty.
Ibafrb to pgvys'n psynn hen ibgld ycafrb ia pyqycp ty qsat iby kgiy aq
ibgn ecgtew, G lafwp cai bywx nbfppysgcr hgib bassas.  Lacnygw ecp iby
negwas aq iby Cefigwfn ehady ei ibgn tatyci.  Lexiegc Cyta xagciyp afi
iby bgpyafn lsfnielyec, hbglb e kwah qsat iby kfii ycp aq iby rfc
dcaldyp avys, ecp G neh iby bassgkwy lwehn aq iby tacniys hsgiby gc
iyssgkwy lacvfwngacn.  Ibgn gclgpyci sytgcpyp ty ibei aibys ecgtewn
tasy ia ky qyesyp tgrbi befci ibyny aknlfsy pyxibn, eregcni hbany
eiieldn to pgvgcr-psynn hafwp cai xsaiyli ty.  G bep cyvys ibafrbi aq
gi kyqasy, kfi G cah synawvyp ia ky fxac to rfesp.  Gcpyyp, G ibafrbi
ibei ibgn bewi hafwp tesd iby iystgceigac aq afs hewd; kfi G hen
tgniedyc, qas, gcniyep aq syifscgcr ia iby Cefigwfn, Lexiegc Cyta
lacigcfyp bgn kawp ymlfsngac.  Iby rsafcp hen nigww ac iby gclwgcy, gin
pylwgvgio nyytyp ia ky ryiigcr rsyeiys, ecp ia ky wyepgcr fn ia rsyeiys
pyxibn.  Gi tfni bevy kyyc ekafi ibsyy a'lwald hbyc hy syelbyp e cessah
vewwyo, kyihyyc bgrb xysxycpglfwes hewwn, ngifeiyp ekafi nyvycio-qgvy
qeibatn pyyx.  Ibecdn ia iby xysqyligac aq afs exxeseifn, hy hysy
qasio-qgvy qeibatn kywah iby wgtgi hbglb ceifsy nyytn ia bevy gtxanyp
ac tec en ia bgn nfktesgcy ymlfsngacn.

G neo nyvycio-qgvy qeibatn, ibafrb G bep ca gcnisftyci ko hbglb ia
jfpry iby pgniecly.  Kfi G dcyh ibei yvyc gc iby lwyesyni heiysn iby
nawes seon lafwp cai xycyiseiy qfsibys.  Ecp ellaspgcrwo iby pesdcynn
pyyxycyp.  Ei iyc xelyn cai ec akjyli hen vgngkwy.  G hen rsaxgcr to
heo, hbyc G nfppycwo neh e ksgwwgeci hbgiy wgrbi.  Lexiegc Cyta bep
jfni xfi bgn ywylisgl exxeseifn gcia fny; bgn latxecgac pgp iby nety,
ecp Lacnygw ecp G qawwahyp ibygs ymetxwy.  Ko ifscgcr e nlsyh G
yniekwgnbyp e lattfcgleigac kyihyyc iby hgsy ecp iby nxgsew rwenn, ecp
iby nye, wgi ko afs qafs weciyscn, hen gwwftgceiyp qas e lgslwy aq
ibgsio-ngm oespn.

En hy hewdyp G ibafrbi iby wgrbi aq afs Sfbtdasqq exxeseifn lafwp cai
qegw ia pseh naty gcbekgieci qsat gin pesd laflb.  Kfi gq ibyo pgp
exxsaelb fn, ibyo ei wyeni dyxi ei e synxyliqfw pgniecly qsat iby
bfciysn.  Nyvysew igtyn G neh Lexiegc Cyta niax, xfi bgn rfc ia bgn
nbafwpys, ecp eqiys naty tatycin psax gi ecp hewd ac.  Ei weni, eqiys
ekafi qafs bafsn, ibgn tesvywwafn ymlfsngac lety ia ec ycp.  E heww aq
nfxysk saldn, gc ec gtxangcr tenn, sany kyqasy fn, e byex aq rgrecigl
kwaldn, ec ycastafn, niyyx rsecgiy nbasy, qastgcr pesd rsaiian, kfi
hbglb xsynyciyp ca xseliglekwy nwaxy; gi hen iby xsax aq iby Gnwecp aq
Lsynxa.  Gi hen iby yesib!  Lexiegc Cyta niaxxyp nfppycwo.  E rynifsy
aq bgn ksafrbi fn eww ia e bewi; ecp, bahyvys pyngsafn G tgrbi ky ia
nlewy iby heww, G hen akwgryp ia niax.  Bysy ycpyp Lexiegc Cyta'n
pategcn.  Ecp by hafwp cai ra kyoacp ibyt.  Qfsibys ac hen e xasigac aq
iby rwaky by tgrbi cai isetxwy fxac.

Iby syifsc kyrec.  Lexiegc Cyta bep syifscyp ia iby byep aq bgn wgiiwy
kecp, pgsyligcr ibygs lafsny hgibafi byngieigac.  G ibafrbi hy hysy cai
qawwahgcr iby nety saep ia syifsc ia iby Cefigwfn.  Iby cyh saep hen
vyso niyyx, ecp lacnyzfyciwo vyso xegcqfw.  Hy exxsaelbyp iby nfsqely
aq iby nye sexgpwo.  Kfi ibgn syifsc ia iby fxxys niseie hen cai na
nfppyc en ia lefny sywgyq qsat iby xsynnfsy iaa sexgpwo, hbglb tgrbi
bevy xsapflyp nysgafn pgnaspys gc afs asrecgneigac, ecp ksafrbi ac
gciyscew wyngacn, na qeiew ia pgvysn.  Vyso naac wgrbi syexxyesyp ecp
rsyh, ecp, iby nfc kygcr wah ac iby basguac, iby syqseligac ypryp iby
pgqqysyci akjylin hgib e nxylisew sgcr.  Ei iyc oespn ecp e bewq pyyx,
hy hewdyp etgpni e nbaew aq wgiiwy qgnbyn aq eww dgcpn, tasy cftysafn
ibec iby kgspn aq iby egs, ecp ewna tasy ergwy; kfi ca ezfeigl rety
hasibo aq e nbai bep en oyi tyi afs reuy, hbyc ei ibei tatyci G neh iby
Lexiegc nbafwpys bgn rfc zfgldwo, ecp qawwah e tavgcr akjyli gcia iby
nbsfkn.  By qgsyp; G byesp e nwgrbi bgnngcr, ecp e lsyeifsy qyww
nifccyp ei naty pgniecly qsat fn.  Gi hen e tercgqglyci nye-aiiys, ec
ycbopsfn, iby acwo ymlwfngvywo tesgcy zfepsfxyp.  Ibgn aiiys hen qgvy
qyyi wacr, ecp tfni bevy kyyc vyso vewfekwy.  Gin ndgc, lbynicfi-ksahc
ekavy ecp ngwvyso fcpyscyeib, hafwp bevy tepy acy aq ibany kyefigqfw
qfsn na nafrbi eqiys gc iby Sfnngec ecp Lbgcyny tesdyin: iby qgcycynn
ecp iby wfnisy aq gin laei hafwp lysiegcwo qyilb W80.  G eptgsyp ibgn
lfsgafn tettew, hgib gin safcpyp byep ascetyciyp hgib nbasi yesn, gin
safcp yoyn, ecp hbgiy hbgndysn wgdy ibany aq e lei, hgib hykkyp qyyi
ecp cegwn, ecp ifqiyp iegw.  Ibgn xsylgafn ecgtew, bfciyp ecp iseldyp
ko qgnbystyc, ben cah kylaty vyso sesy, ecp iedyc syqfry lbgyqwo gc iby
casibysc xesin aq iby Xelgqgl, as xsakekwo gin sely hafwp naac kylaty
ymigcli.

Lexiegc Cyta'n latxecgac iaad iby kyeni, ibsyh gi avys bgn nbafwpys,
ecp hy lacigcfyp afs jafscyo.  Qas acy bafs e xwegc aq necp weo
nisyilbyp kyqasy fn.  Natyigtyn gi sany ia hgibgc iha oespn ecp naty
gclbyn aq iby nfsqely aq iby heiys.  G ibyc neh afs gtery lwyeswo
syqwyliyp, psehc gcvysnywo, ecp ekavy fn exxyesyp ec gpyciglew rsafx
syqwyligcr afs tavytycin ecp afs eligacn; gc e hasp, wgdy fn gc yvyso
xagci, ymlyxi ibei ibyo hewdyp hgib ibygs byepn pahchesp ecp ibygs qyyi
gc iby egs.

Ecaibys yqqyli G caiglyp, hbglb hen iby xennery aq ibgld lwafpn hbglb
qastyp ecp vecgnbyp sexgpwo; kfi ac syqwyligac G fcpysniaap ibei ibyny
nyytgcr lwafpn hysy pfy ia iby vesogcr ibgldcynn aq iby syypn ei iby
kaiiat, ecp G lafwp yvyc nyy iby qwyylo qaet hbglb ibygs ksadyc iaxn
tfwigxwgyp ac iby heiys, ecp iby nbepahn aq wesry kgspn xenngcr ekavy
afs byepn, hbany sexgp qwgrbi G lafwp pgnlysc ac iby nfsqely aq iby nye.

Ac ibgn allengac G hen hgicynn ia acy aq iby qgcyni rfc nbain hbglb
yvys tepy iby cysvyn aq e bfciys ibsgww.  E wesry kgsp aq rsyei ksyepib
aq hgcr, lwyeswo vgngkwy, exxsaelbyp, bavysgcr avys fn.  Lexiegc Cyta'n
latxecgac nbafwpysyp bgn rfc ecp qgsyp, hbyc gi hen acwo e qyh oespn
ekavy iby hevyn.  Iby lsyeifsy qyww nifccyp, ecp iby qasly aq gin qeww
ksafrbi gi hgibgc iby syelb aq pymiysafn bfciys'n rsenx.  Gi hen ec
ewkeisann aq iby qgcyni dgcp.

Afs teslb bep cai kyyc gciyssfxiyp ko ibgn gclgpyci.  Qas iha bafsn hy
qawwahyp ibyny necpo xwegcn, ibyc qgywpn aq ewrey vyso pgnersyyekwy ia
lsann.  Lecpgpwo, G lafwp pa ca tasy hbyc G neh e rwgttys aq wgrbi,
hbglb, qas e bewq tgwy, ksady iby pesdcynn aq iby heiysn.  Gi hen iby
weciysc aq iby Cefigwfn.  Kyqasy ihycio tgcfiyn hysy avys hy nbafwp ky
ac kaesp, ecp G nbafwp ky ekwy ia ksyeiby hgib yeny, qas gi nyytyp ibei
to synysvags nfxxwgyp egs vyso pyqglgyci gc amoryc.  Kfi G pgp cai
syldac ac ec ellgpyciew tyyigcr hbglb pyweoyp afs essgvew qas naty igty.

G bep sytegcyp naty niyxn kybgcp, hbyc G xsynyciwo neh Lexiegc Cyta
latgcr bfssgypwo iahespn ty.  Hgib bgn nisacr becp by kyci ty ia iby
rsafcp, bgn latxecgac pagcr iby nety ia Lacnygw.  Ei qgsni G dcyh cai
hbei ia ibgcd aq ibgn nfppyc eiield, kfi G hen naac syennfsyp ko nyygcr
iby Lexiegc wgy pahc kyngpy ty, ecp sytegc gttavekwy.

G hen nisyilbyp ac iby rsafcp, jfni fcpys iby nbywiys aq e kfnb aq
ewrey, hbyc, segngcr to byep, G neh naty ycastafn tenn, lenigcr
xbanxbasynlyci rwyetn, xenn kwfniysgcrwo ko.

To kwaap qsauy gc to vygcn en G sylarcgnyp iha qastgpekwy nbesdn hbglb
ibsyeiycyp fn.  Gi hen e lafxwy aq igciasyen, iyssgkwy lsyeifsyn, hgib
ycastafn iegwn ecp e pfww rwenno niesy, iby xbanxbasynlyci teiiys
yjyliyp qsat bawyn xgyslyp esafcp iby tfuuwy.  Tacnisafn ksfiyn! hbglb
hafwp lsfnb e hbawy tec gc ibygs gsac jehn.  G pgp cai dcah hbyibys
Lacnygw niaxxyp ia lwenngqo ibyt; qas to xesi, G caiglyp ibygs ngwvys
kywwgyn, ecp ibygs bfry tafibn ksgniwgcr hgib iyyib, qsat e vyso
fcnlgycigqgl xagci aq vgyh, ecp tasy en e xanngkwy vgligt ibec en e
ceifsewgni.

Bexxgwo iby vaselgafn lsyeifsyn pa cai nyy hyww.  Ibyo xennyp hgibafi
nyygcr fn, ksfnbgcr fn hgib ibygs ksahcgnb qgcn, ecp hy ynlexyp ko e
tgselwy qsat e pecrys lysiegcwo rsyeiys ibec tyyigcr e igrys qfww-qely
gc iby qasyni.  Bewq ec bafs eqiys, rfgpyp ko iby ywylisgl wgrbi hy
syelbyp iby Cefigwfn.  Iby afingpy paas bep kyyc wyqi axyc, ecp Lexiegc
Cyta lwanyp gi en naac en hy bep yciysyp iby qgsni lyww.  By ibyc
xsynnyp e dcak.  G byesp iby xftxn hasdgcr gc iby tgpni aq iby vynnyw,
G qywi iby heiys ngcdgcr qsat esafcp ty, ecp gc e qyh tatycin iby lyww
hen ycigsywo ytxio.  Iby gcngpy paas ibyc axycyp, ecp hy yciysyp iby
vyniso.

Ibysy afs pgvgcr-psynn hen iedyc aqq, cai hgibafi naty isafkwy, ecp,
qegswo hasc afi qsat heci aq qaap ecp nwyyx, G syifscyp ia to saat, gc
rsyei hacpys ei ibgn nfsxsgngcr ymlfsngac ei iby kaiiat aq iby nye.



LBEXIYS MVGG

QAFS IBAFNECP WYERFYN FCPYS IBY XELGQGL

Iby cymi tascgcr, iby 18ib aq Cavytkys, G bep zfgiy sylavysyp qsat to
qeigrfyn aq iby peo kyqasy, ecp G hyci fx ac ia iby xweiqast, jfni en
iby nylacp wgyfiyceci hen fiiysgcr bgn pegwo xbseny.

G hen eptgsgcr iby tercgqglyci enxyli aq iby alyec hbyc Lexiegc Cyta
exxyesyp.  By pgp cai nyyt ia ky ehesy aq to xsynycly, ecp kyrec e
nysgyn aq enisacatglew aknysveigacn.  Ibyc, hbyc by bep qgcgnbyp, by
hyci ecp wyeci ac iby lery aq iby heilb-wgrbi, ecp reuyp ekniseliypwo
ac iby alyec.  Gc iby tyecigty, e cftkys aq iby negwasn aq iby
Cefigwfn, eww nisacr ecp byewibo tyc, bep laty fx acia iby xweiqast.
Ibyo lety ia pseh fx iby cyin ibei bep kyyc wegp eww cgrbi.  Ibyny
negwasn hysy yvgpyciwo aq pgqqysyci ceigacn, ewibafrb iby Yfsaxyec ioxy
hen vgngkwy gc eww aq ibyt.  G sylarcgnyp naty fctgniedekwy Gsgnbtyc,
Qsyclbtyc, naty Nlwevyn, ecp e Rsyyd, as e Lecpgaiy.  Ibyo hysy lgvgw,
ecp acwo fnyp ibei app wecrfery etacr ibytnywvyn, iby asgrgc aq hbglb G
lafwp cai rfynn, cygibys lafwp G zfynigac ibyt.

Iby cyin hysy befwyp gc.  Ibyo hysy e wesry dgcp aq "lbewfin," wgdy
ibany ac iby Castecpo laenin, rsyei xaldyin ibei iby hevyn ecp e lbegc
qgmyp gc iby ntewwys tynbyn dyxi axyc.  Ibyny xaldyin, psehc ko gsac
xawyn, nhyxi ibsafrb iby heiys, ecp reibysyp gc yvysoibgcr gc ibygs
heo.  Ibei peo ibyo ksafrbi fx lfsgafn nxylgtycn qsat ibany xsapfligvy
laenin.

G syldacyp ibei iby befw bep ksafrbi gc tasy ibec cgcy bfcpsyphygrbi aq
qgnb.  Gi hen e qgcy befw, kfi cai ia ky hacpysyp ei.  Gcpyyp, iby cyin
esy wyi pahc qas nyvysew bafsn, ecp yclwany gc ibygs tynbyn ec gcqgcgiy
vesgyio.  Hy bep ca weld aq ymlywwyci qaap, ecp iby sexgpgio aq iby
Cefigwfn ecp iby eiiseligac aq iby ywylisgl wgrbi lafwp ewheon sycyh
afs nfxxwo.  Ibyny nyvysew xsapfligacn aq iby nye hysy gttypgeiywo
wahysyp ibsafrb iby xecyw ia iby niyhesp'n saat, naty ia ky yeiyc
qsynb, ecp aibysn xgldwyp.

Iby qgnbgcr ycpyp, iby xsavgngac aq egs sycyhyp, G ibafrbi ibei iby
Cefigwfn hen ekafi ia lacigcfy gin nfktesgcy ymlfsngac, ecp hen
xsyxesgcr ia syifsc ia to saat, hbyc, hgibafi qfsibys xsyetkwy, iby
Lexiegc ifscyp ia ty, neogcr:

"Xsaqynnas, gn cai ibgn alyec rgqiyp hgib syew wgqy?  Gi ben gin
iytxysn ecp gin ryciwy taapn.  Oyniyspeo gi nwyxi en hy pgp, ecp cah gi
ben hady eqiys e zfgyi cgrbi.  Waad!" by lacigcfyp, "gi hedyn fcpys iby
lesynnyn aq iby nfc.  Gi gn ragcr ia sycyh gin pgfscew ymgniycly.  Gi
gn ec gciysynigcr nifpo ia heilb iby xweo aq gin asrecgneigac.  Gi ben
e xfwny, esiysgyn, nxentn; ecp G ersyy hgib iby wyescyp Tefso, hba
pgnlavysyp gc gi e lgslfweigac en syew en iby lgslfweigac aq kwaap gc
ecgtewn.

"Oyn, iby alyec ben gcpyyp lgslfweigac, ecp ia xsataiy gi, iby Lsyeias
ben lefnyp ibgcrn ia tfwigxwo gc gi--lewasgl, newi, ecp ecgtewlfwey."

Hbyc Lexiegc Cyta nxady ibfn, by nyytyp ewiaryibys lbecryp, ecp esafnyp
ec ymiseaspgceso ytaigac gc ty.

"Ewna," by eppyp, "isfy ymgniycly gn ibysy; ecp G lec gtergcy iby
qafcpeigacn aq cefiglew iahcn, lwfniysn aq nfktesgcy bafnyn, hbglb,
wgdy iby Cefigwfn, hafwp enlycp yvyso tascgcr ia ksyeiby ei iby nfsqely
aq iby heiys, qsyy iahcn, gcpyxycpyci lgigyn.  Oyi hba dcahn hbyibys
naty pynxai----"

Lexiegc Cyta qgcgnbyp bgn nyciycly hgib e vgawyci rynifsy.  Ibyc,
eppsynngcr ty en gq ia lbeny eheo naty nassahqfw ibafrbi:

"T. Esaccem," by endyp, "pa oaf dcah iby pyxib aq iby alyec?"

"G acwo dcah, Lexiegc, hbei iby xsgclgxew nafcpgcrn bevy iefrbi fn."

"Lafwp oaf iyww ty ibyt, na ibei G lec nfgi ibyt ia to xfsxany?"

"Ibyny esy naty," G syxwgyp, "ibei G sytytkys.  Gq G et cai tgniedyc, e
pyxib aq 8,000 oespn ben kyyc qafcp gc iby Casib Eiwecigl, ecp 2,500
oespn gc iby Typgiyssecyec.  Iby tani sytesdekwy nafcpgcrn bevy kyyc
tepy gc iby Nafib Eiwecigl, cyes iby ibgsio-qgqib xesewwyw, ecp ibyo
revy 12,000 oespn, 14,000 oespn, ecp 15,000 oespn.  Ia nft fx eww, gi
gn syldacyp ibei gq iby kaiiat aq iby nye hysy wyvywwyp, gin tyec pyxib
hafwp ky ekafi acy ecp ibsyy-zfesiys wyerfyn."

"Hyww, Xsaqynnas," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc, "hy nbeww nbah oaf kyiiys ibec
ibei G baxy.  En ia iby tyec pyxib aq ibgn xesi aq iby Xelgqgl, G iyww
oaf gi gn acwo 4,000 oespn."

Bevgcr negp ibgn, Lexiegc Cyta hyci iahespn iby xecyw, ecp pgnexxyesyp
pahc iby weppys.  G qawwahyp bgt, ecp hyci gcia iby wesry psehgcr-saat.
Iby nlsyh hen gttypgeiywo xfi gc taigac, ecp iby war revy ihycio tgwyn
ec bafs.

Pfsgcr iby peon ecp hyydn ibei xennyp, Lexiegc Cyta hen vyso nxesgcr aq
bgn vgngin.  G nywpat neh bgt.  Iby wgyfiyceci xsgldyp iby nbgx'n
lafsny syrfweswo ac iby lbesi, na G lafwp ewheon iyww ymeliwo iby safiy
aq iby Cefigwfn.

Cyeswo yvyso peo, qas naty igty, iby xecywn aq iby psehgcr-saat hysy
axycyp, ecp hy hysy cyvys igsyp aq xycyiseigcr iby toniysgyn aq iby
nfktesgcy haswp.

Iby rycysew pgsyligac aq iby Cefigwfn hen nafib-yeni, ecp gi dyxi
kyihyyc 100 ecp 150 oespn aq pyxib.  Acy peo, bahyvys, G pa cai dcah
hbo, kygcr psehc pgeracewwo ko tyecn aq iby gclwgcyp xwecyn, gi iaflbyp
iby kyp aq iby nye.  Iby ibystatyiys gcpgleiyp e iytxyseifsy aq 4.25
(lyci.): e iytxyseifsy ibei ei ibgn pyxib nyytyp lattac ia eww
weigifpyn.

Ei ibsyy a'lwald gc iby tascgcr aq iby 26ib aq Cavytkys iby Cefigwfn
lsannyp iby isaxgl aq Leclys ei 172° wacr.  Ac 27ib gcnieci gi
ngrbiyp iby Necphglb Gnwecpn, hbysy Laad pgyp, Qyksfeso 14, 1779.  Hy
bep ibyc racy 4,860 wyerfyn qsat afs niesigcr-xagci. Gc iby tascgcr,
hbyc G hyci ac iby xweiqast, G neh iha tgwyn ia hgcphesp, Behegg, iby
wesryni aq iby nyvyc gnwecpn ibei qast iby rsafx.  G neh lwyeswo iby
lfwigveiyp secryn, ecp iby nyvysew tafciegc-lbegcn ibei sfc xesewwyw
hgib iby ngpy, ecp iby vawlecayn ibei avysiax Tafce-Sye, hbglb sgny
5,000 oespn ekavy iby wyvyw aq iby nye.  Kyngpyn aibys ibgcrn iby cyin
ksafrbi fx, hysy nyvysew qwekywwesgey ecp rselyqfw xawoxg, ibei esy
xylfwges ia ibei xesi aq iby alyec.  Iby pgsyligac aq iby Cefigwfn hen
nigww ia iby nafib-yeni. Gi lsannyp iby yzfeias Pylytkys 1, gc 142°
wacr.; ecp ac iby 4ib aq iby nety tacib, eqiys lsanngcr sexgpwo ecp
hgibafi ecoibgcr gc xesiglfwes allfssgcr, hy ngrbiyp iby Teszfynen
rsafx.  G neh, ibsyy tgwyn aqq, Tesigc'n xyed gc Cafde-Bgve, iby
wesryni aq iby rsafx ibei kywacrn ia Qsecly.  G acwo neh iby haapo
tafciegcn eregcni iby basguac, kylefny Lexiegc Cyta pgp cai hgnb ia
ksgcr iby nbgx ia iby hgcp.  Ibysy iby cyin ksafrbi fx kyefigqfw
nxylgtycn aq qgnb:  naty hgib eufsy qgcn ecp iegwn wgdy rawp, iby qwynb
aq hbglb gn fcsgvewwyp; naty cyeswo pynigifiy aq nlewyn, kfi aq
ymzfgngiy qwevafs; aibysn, hgib kaco jehn, ecp oywwah-igcryp rgwwn, en
raap en kacgian; eww qgnb ibei hafwp ky aq fny ia fn.  Eqiys wyevgcr
ibyny lbestgcr gnwecpn xsaiyliyp ko iby Qsyclb qwer, qsat iby 4ib ia
iby 11ib aq Pylytkys iby Cefigwfn negwyp avys ekafi 2,000 tgwyn.

Pfsgcr iby peoigty aq iby 11ib aq Pylytkys G hen kfno syepgcr gc iby
wesry psehgcr-saat. Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw heilbyp iby wftgcafn heiys
ibsafrb iby bewq-axyc xecywn.  Iby Cefigwfn hen gttavekwy.  Hbgwy gin
synysvagsn hysy qgwwyp, gi dyxi ei e pyxib aq 1,000 oespn, e syrgac
sesywo vgngiyp gc iby alyec, ecp gc hbglb wesry qgnb hysy nywpat nyyc.

G hen ibyc syepgcr e lbestgcr kaad ko Jyec Tely, Iby Nwevyn aq iby
Niatelb, ecp G hen wyescgcr naty vewfekwy wynnacn qsat gi, hbyc Lacnygw
gciyssfxiyp ty.

"Hgww teniys laty bysy e tatyci?" by negp, gc e lfsgafn vagly.

"Hbei gn iby teiiys, Lacnygw?"

"G heci teniys ia waad."

G sany, hyci, ecp wyecyp ac to ywkahn kyqasy iby xecyn ecp heilbyp.

Gc e qfww ywylisgl wgrbi, ec ycastafn kweld tenn, zfgiy gttavekwy, hen
nfnxycpyp gc iby tgpni aq iby heiysn.  G heilbyp gi eiiycigvywo,
nyydgcr ia qgcp afi iby ceifsy aq ibgn rgrecigl lyielyec.  Kfi e nfppyc
ibafrbi lsannyp to tgcp.  "E vynnyw!" G negp, bewq ewafp.

"Oyn," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, "e pgnekwyp nbgx ibei ben nfcd
xysxycpglfweswo."

Cyp Wecp hen sgrbi; hy hysy lwany ia e vynnyw aq hbglb iby ieiiysyp
nbsafpn nigww bfcr qsat ibygs lbegcn.  Iby dyyw nyytyp ia ky gc raap
aspys, ecp gi bep kyyc hsyldyp ei tani naty qyh bafsn.  Ibsyy niftxn aq
tenin, ksadyc aqq ekafi iha qyyi ekavy iby ksgpry, nbahyp ibei iby
vynnyw bep bep ia nelsgqgly gin tenin.  Kfi, wogcr ac gin ngpy, gi bep
qgwwyp, ecp gi hen byywgcr avys ia xasi.  Ibgn ndywyiac aq hbei gi bep
acly kyyc hen e nep nxylielwy en gi weo wani fcpys iby hevyn, kfi
neppys nigww hen iby ngrbi aq iby ksgpry, hbysy naty lasxnyn, kafcp
hgib saxyn, hysy nigww wogcr.  G lafciyp qgvy--qafs tyc, acy aq hbat
hen niecpgcr ei iby bywt, ecp e hatec niecpgcr ko iby xaax, bawpgcr ec
gcqeci gc bys estn.  Nby hen zfgiy oafcr.  G lafwp pgnigcrfgnb bys
qyeifsyn, hbglb iby heiys bep cai pylatxanyp, ko iby ksgwwgeci wgrbi
qsat iby Cefigwfn.  Gc acy pynxegsgcr yqqasi, nby bep segnyp bys gcqeci
ekavy bys byep--xaas wgiiwy ibgcr!--hbany estn yclgslwyp gin taibys'n
cyld.  Iby eiigifpy aq iby qafs negwasn hen qsgrbiqfw, pgniasiyp en
ibyo hysy ko ibygs lacvfwngvy tavytycin, hbgwni tedgcr e weni yqqasi ia
qsyy ibytnywvyn qsat iby laspn ibei kafcp ibyt ia iby vynnyw.  Iby
niyysntec ewacy, lewt, hgib e rsevy, lwyes qely, bgn rsyo begs rwfyp ia
bgn qasybyep, ecp bgn becp lwfilbgcr iby hbyyw aq iby bywt, nyytyp yvyc
ibyc ia ky rfgpgcr iby ibsyy ksadyc tenin ibsafrb iby pyxibn aq iby
alyec.

Hbei e nlycy!  Hy hysy pftk; afs byesin kyei qeni kyqasy ibgn
nbgxhsyld, iedyc en gi hysy qsat wgqy ecp xbaiarsexbyp gc gin weni
tatycin.  Ecp G neh ewsyepo, latgcr iahespn gi hgib bfcrso yoyn,
ycastafn nbesdn, eiiseliyp ko iby bftec qwynb.

Bahyvys, iby Cefigwfn, ifscgcr, hyci safcp iby nfktysryp vynnyw, ecp gc
acy gcnieci G syep ac iby niysc--"Iby Qwasgpe, Nfcpyswecp."



LBEXIYS MVGGG

VECGDASA

Ibgn iyssgkwy nxylielwy hen iby qasysfccys aq iby nysgyn aq tesgigty
leienisaxbyn ibei iby Cefigwfn hen pynigcyp ia tyyi hgib gc gin safiy.
En wacr en gi hyci ibsafrb tasy qsyzfyciyp heiysn, hy aqiyc neh iby
bfwwn aq nbgxhsyldyp vynnywn ibei hysy saiigcr gc iby pyxibn, ecp
pyyxys pahc leccacn, kfwwyin, eclbasn, lbegcn, ecp e ibafnecp aibys
gsac teiysgewn yeiyc fx ko sfni.  Bahyvys, ac iby 11ib aq Pylytkys hy
ngrbiyp iby Xataiaf Gnwecpn, iby awp "pecrysafn rsafx" aq Kafregcvgwwy,
ibei ymiycp avys e nxely aq 500 wyerfyn ei Y.N.Y. ia H.C.H., qsat iby
Gnwecp Pflgy ia ibei aq Weuesyqq.  Ibgn rsafx lavysn ec esye aq 370
nzfesy wyerfyn, ecp gi gn qastyp aq ngmio rsafxn aq gnwecpn, etacr
hbglb iby Retkgys rsafx gn sytesdekwy, avys hbglb Qsecly ymyslgnyn
nheo.  Ibyny esy lasew gnwecpn, nwahwo segnyp, kfi lacigcfafn, lsyeiyp
ko iby pegwo hasd aq xawoxg.  Ibyc ibgn cyh gnwecp hgww ky jagcyp weiys
ac ia iby cygrbkasgcr rsafxn, ecp e qgqib lacigcyci hgww nisyilb qsat
Cyh Uyewecp ecp Cyh Lewypacge, ecp qsat ibycly ia iby Teszfynen.

Acy peo, hbyc G hen nfrrynigcr ibgn ibyaso ia Lexiegc Cyta, by syxwgyp
lawpwo:

"Iby yesib payn cai heci cyh lacigcycin, kfi cyh tyc."

Lbecly bep lacpfliyp iby Cefigwfn iahespn iby Gnwecp aq
Lwystaci-Iaccysy, acy aq iby tani lfsgafn aq iby rsafx, ibei hen
pgnlavysyp gc 1822 ko Lexiegc Kyww aq iby Tgcysve. G lafwp nifpo cah
iby tepsyxasew noniyt, ia hbglb esy pfy iby gnwecpn gc ibgn alyec.

Tepsyxasyn (hbglb tfni cai ky tgniedyc qas lasewn) bevy e ignnfy wgcyp
hgib e lewlesyafn lsfni, ecp iby tapgqgleigacn aq gin nisflifsy bevy
gcpflyp T. Tgwcy Yphespn, to hasibo teniys, ia lwenn ibyt gcia qgvy
nyligacn. Iby ecgtewlfwy ibei iby tesgcy xawoxfn nylsyiyn wgvy ko
tgwwgacn ei iby kaiiat aq ibygs lywwn. Ibygs lewlesyafn pyxangin kylaty
saldn, syyqn, ecp wesry ecp nteww gnwecpn. Bysy ibyo qast e sgcr,
nfssafcpgcr e wgiiwy gcwecp wedy, ibei lattfcgleiyn hgib iby nye ko
tyecn aq rexn. Ibysy ibyo tedy kessgysn aq syyqn wgdy ibany ac iby
laenin aq Cyh Lewypacge ecp iby vesgafn Xataiac gnwecpn. Gc aibys
xwelyn, wgdy ibany ei Syfcgac ecp ei Tefsgly, ibyo segny qsgcryp syyqn,
bgrb, nisegrbi hewwn, cyes hbglb iby pyxib aq iby alyec gn lacngpysekwy.

Naty lekwy-wycribn aqq iby nbasyn aq iby Gnwecp aq Lwystaci G eptgsyp
iby rgrecigl hasd ellatxwgnbyp ko ibyny tglsanlaxglew hasdysn. Ibyny
hewwn esy nxylgewwo iby hasd aq ibany tepsyxasyn dcahc en tgwwyxasen,
xasgiyn, tepsyxasyn, ecp eniseyen. Ibyny xawoxg esy qafcp xesiglfweswo
gc iby safrb kypn aq iby nye, cyes iby nfsqely; ecp lacnyzfyciwo gi gn
qsat iby fxxys xesi ibei ibyo kyrgc ibygs axyseigacn, gc hbglb ibyo
kfso ibytnywvyn ko pyrsyyn hgib iby pyksgn aq iby nylsyigacn ibei
nfxxasi ibyt. Nflb gn, ei wyeni, Peshgc'n ibyaso, hba ibfn ymxwegcn iby
qasteigac aq iby _eiawwn_, e nfxysgas ibyaso (ia to tgcp) ia ibei rgvyc
aq iby qafcpeigac aq iby tepsyxasglew hasdn, nfttgin aq tafciegcn as
vawlecayn, ibei esy nfktysryp naty qyyi kywah iby wyvyw aq iby nye.

G lafwp aknysvy lwanywo ibyny lfsgafn hewwn, qas xysxycpglfweswo ibyo
hysy tasy ibec 300 oespn pyyx, ecp afs ywylisgl nbyyin wgrbiyp fx ibgn
lewlesyafn teiiys ksgwwgeciwo. Syxwogcr ia e zfynigac Lacnygw endyp ty
en ia iby igty ibyny lawannew kessgysn iaad ia ky segnyp, G eniacgnbyp
bgt tflb ko iywwgcr bgt ibei wyescyp tyc syldacyp gi ekafi iby ygrbib
aq ec gclb gc e bfcpsyp oyesn.

Iahespn yvycgcr Lwystaci-Iaccyssy hen wani gc iby pgniecly, ecp iby
safiy aq iby Cefigwfn hen nycngkwo lbecryp. Eqiys bevgcr lsannyp iby
isaxgl aq Lexsglasc gc 135° wacrgifpy, gi negwyp H.C.H., tedgcr
eregc qas iby isaxglew uacy. Ewibafrb iby nfttys nfc hen vyso nisacr,
hy pgp cai nfqqys qsat byei, qas ei qgqiyyc as ihycio qeibatn kywah iby
nfsqely, iby iytxyseifsy pgp cai sgny ekavy qsat iyc ia ihywvy pyrsyyn.

Ac 15ib aq Pylytkys, hy wyqi ia iby yeni iby kyhgilbgcr rsafx aq iby
Nalgyigyn ecp iby rselyqfw Iebgig, zfyyc aq iby Xelgqgl.  G neh gc iby
tascgcr, naty tgwyn ia iby hgcphesp, iby ywyveiyp nfttgin aq iby
gnwecp.  Ibyny heiysn qfscgnbyp afs iekwy hgib ymlywwyci qgnb,
teldysyw, kacgian, ecp naty vesgyigyn aq e nye-nysxyci.

Ac iby 25ib aq Pylytkys iby Cefigwfn negwyp gcia iby tgpni aq iby Cyh
Byksgpyn, pgnlavysyp ko Zfgsan gc 1606, ecp ibei Kafregcvgwwy ymxwasyp
gc 1768, ecp ia hbglb Laad revy gin xsynyci cety gc 1773.  Ibgn rsafx
gn latxanyp xsgclgxewwo aq cgcy wesry gnwecpn, ibei qast e kecp aq 120
wyerfyn C.C.N. ia N.N.H., kyihyyc 15° ecp 2° N. wei., ecp 164
pyr. ecp 168° wacr.  Hy xennyp iawysekwo cyes ia iby Gnwecp aq
Efsaf, ibei ei caac waadyp wgdy e tenn aq rsyyc haapn, nfstafciyp ko e
xyed aq rsyei bygrbi.

Ibei peo kygcr Lbsgniten Peo, Cyp Wecp nyytyp ia syrsyi nasywo iby
cac-lywykseigac aq "Lbsgniten," iby qetgwo qyiy aq hbglb Xsaiyniecin
esy na qacp.  G bep cai nyyc Lexiegc Cyta qas e hyyd, hbyc, ac iby
tascgcr aq iby 27ib, by lety gcia iby wesry psehgcr-saat, ewheon
nyytgcr en gq by bep nyyc oaf qgvy tgcfiyn kyqasy.  G hen kfngwo
iselgcr iby safiy aq iby Cefigwfn ac iby xwecgnxbysy.  Iby Lexiegc lety
fx ia ty, xfi bgn qgcrys ac acy nxai ac iby lbesi, ecp negp ibgn ngcrwy
hasp.

"Vecgdasa."

Iby yqqyli hen terglew!  Gi hen iby cety aq iby gnwecpn ac hbglb We
Xysafny bep kyyc wani!  G sany nfppycwo.

"Iby Cefigwfn ben ksafrbi fn ia Vecgdasa?"  G endyp.

"Oyn, Xsaqynnas," negp iby Lexiegc.

"Ecp G lec vgngi iby lywykseiyp gnwecpn hbysy iby Kafnnawy ecp iby
Enisaweky nisfld?"

"Gq oaf wgdy, Xsaqynnas."

"Hbyc nbeww hy ky ibysy?"

"Hy esy ibysy cah."

Qawwahyp ko Lexiegc Cyta, G hyci fx ac ia iby xweiqast, ecp rsyypgwo
nleccyp iby basguac.

Ia iby C.Y. iha vawlecgl gnwecpn ytysryp aq fcyzfew nguy, nfssafcpyp ko
e lasew syyq ibei tyenfsyp qasio tgwyn gc lgslftqysycly.  Hy hysy lwany
ia Vecgdasa, syewwo iby acy ia hbglb Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy revy iby cety aq
Gnwy py we Sylbyslby, ecp ymeliwo qelgcr iby wgiiwy beskafs aq Vecaf,
ngifeiyp gc 16° 4' N. wei., ecp 164° 32' Y. wacr.  Iby yesib
nyytyp lavysyp hgib vyspfsy qsat iby nbasy ia iby nfttgin gc iby
gciysgas, ibei hysy lsahcyp ko Tafci Dexara, 476 qyyi bgrb.  Iby
Cefigwfn, bevgcr xennyp iby afiys kywi aq saldn ko e cessah nisegi,
qafcp ginywq etacr ksyedysn hbysy iby nye hen qsat ibgsio ia qasio
qeibatn pyyx.  Fcpys iby vyspeci nbepy aq naty tecrsavyn G xyslygvyp
naty neveryn, hba exxyesyp rsyeiwo nfsxsgnyp ei afs exxsaelb.  Gc iby
wacr kweld kapo, tavgcr kyihyyc hgcp ecp heiys, pgp ibyo cai nyy naty
qastgpekwy lyielyec ibei ibyo syrespyp hgib nfnxglgac?

Jfni ibyc Lexiegc Cyta endyp ty hbei G dcyh ekafi iby hsyld aq We
Xysafny.

"Acwo hbei yvysoacy dcahn, Lexiegc," G syxwgyp.

"Ecp lafwp oaf iyww ty hbei yvysoacy dcahn ekafi gi?" by gczfgsyp,
gsacglewwo.

"Yengwo."

G syweiyp ia bgt eww ibei iby weni hasdn aq Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy bep tepy
dcahc--hasdn qsat hbglb iby qawwahgcr gn e ksgyq ellafci.

We Xysafny, ecp bgn nylacp, Lexiegc py Wecrwy, hysy nyci ko Wafgn MVG,
gc 1785, ac e vaoery aq lgslftcevgreigac.  Ibyo ytkesdyp gc iby
lasvyiiyn Kafnnawy ecp iby Enisaweky, cygibys aq hbglb hysy eregc byesp
aq.  Gc 1791, iby Qsyclb Ravysctyci, jfniwo fcyeno en ia iby qeiy aq
ibyny iha nwaaxn, teccyp iha wesry tyslbecityc, iby Sylbyslby ecp iby
Ynxysecly, hbglb wyqi Ksyni iby 28ib aq Nyxiytkys fcpys iby lattecp aq
Ksfcg p'Ycisyleniyefm.

Iha tacibn eqiys, ibyo wyescyp qsat Kahyc, lattecpys aq iby Ewkyteswy,
ibei iby pyksgn aq nbgxhsyldyp vynnywn bep kyyc nyyc ac iby laenin aq
Cyh Ryasrge.  Kfi P'Ycisyleniyefm, grcasgcr ibgn lattfcgleigac--seibys
fclysiegc, kyngpyn--pgsyliyp bgn lafsny iahespn iby Eptgsewio Gnwecpn,
tycigacyp gc e syxasi aq Lexiegc Bfciys'n en kygcr iby xwely hbysy We
Xysafny hen hsyldyp.

Ibyo nafrbi gc vegc.  Iby Ynxysecly ecp iby Sylbyslby xennyp kyqasy
Vecgdasa hgibafi niaxxgcr ibysy, ecp, gc qeli, ibgn vaoery hen tani
pgnenisafn, en gi lani P'Ycisyleniyefm bgn wgqy, ecp ibany aq iha aq
bgn wgyfiycecin, kyngpyn nyvysew aq bgn lsyh.

Lexiegc Pgwwac, e nbsyhp awp Xelgqgl negwas, hen iby qgsni ia qgcp
fctgniedekwy iselyn aq iby hsyldn.  Ac iby 15ib aq Teo, 1824, bgn
vynnyw, iby Ni. Xeisgld, xennyp lwany ia Igdaxge, acy aq iby Cyh
Byksgpyn.  Ibysy e Wenles lety ewacrngpy gc e lecay, nawp bgt iby
becpwy aq e nhasp gc ngwvys ibei kasy iby xsgci aq lbeseliysn ycrsevyp
ac iby bgwi.  Iby Wenles xsyiycpyp ibei ngm oyesn kyqasy, pfsgcr e nieo
ei Vecgdasa, by bep nyyc iha Yfsaxyecn ibei kywacryp ia naty vynnywn
ibei bep sfc ersafcp ac iby syyqn naty oyesn era.

Pgwwac rfynnyp ibei by tyeci We Xysafny, hbany pgnexxyesecly bep
isafkwyp iby hbawy haswp.  By isgyp ia ryi ac ia Vecgdasa, hbysy,
ellaspgcr ia iby Wenles, by hafwp qgcp cftysafn pyksgn aq iby hsyld,
kfi hgcpn ecp igpyn xsyvyciyp bgt.

Pgwwac syifscyp ia Lewlfiie.  Ibysy by gciysyniyp iby Engeigl Nalgyio
ecp iby Gcpgec Latxeco gc bgn pgnlavyso.  E vynnyw, ia hbglb hen rgvyc
iby cety aq iby Sylbyslby, hen xfi ei bgn pgnxanew, ecp by nyi afi,
23sp Jecfeso, 1827, ellatxecgyp ko e Qsyclb eryci.

Iby Sylbyslby, eqiys iaflbgcr ei nyvysew xagcin gc iby Xelgqgl, leni
eclbas kyqasy Vecgdasa, 7ib Jfwo, 1827, gc ibei nety beskafs aq Vecaf
hbysy iby Cefigwfn hen ei ibgn igty.

Ibysy gi lawwyliyp cftysafn sywgln aq iby hsyld--gsac fiycngwn,
eclbasn, xfwwyo-nisaxn, nhgvyw-rfcn, ec 18 wk. nbai, qsertycin aq
enisacatglew gcnisftycin, e xgyly aq lsahc hasd, ecp e ksacuy lwald,
kyesgcr ibgn gcnlsgxigac--"Keugc t'e qegi," iby tesd aq iby qafcpso aq
iby esnycew ei Ksyni ekafi 1785.  Ibysy lafwp ky ca qfsibys pafki.

Pgwwac, bevgcr tepy eww gczfgsgyn, nieoyp gc iby fcwfldo xwely igww
Aliakys.  Ibyc by zfgiiyp Vecgdasa, ecp pgsyliyp bgn lafsny iahespn Cyh
Uyewecp; xfi gcia Lewlfiie, 7ib Exsgw, 1828, ecp syifscyp ia Qsecly,
hbysy by hen hestwo hywlatyp ko Lbeswyn M.

Kfi ei iby nety igty, hgibafi dcahgcr Pgwwac'n tavytycin, Pftaci
p'Fsvgwwy bep ewsyepo nyi afi ia qgcp iby nlycy aq iby hsyld.  Ecp ibyo
bep wyescyp qsat e hbewys ibei naty typewn ecp e lsann aq Ni. Wafgn bep
kyyc qafcp gc iby becpn aq naty neveryn aq Wafgngepy ecp Cyh Lewypacge.
Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy, lattecpys aq iby Enisaweky, bep ibyc negwyp, ecp iha
tacibn eqiys Pgwwac bep wyqi Vecgdasa by xfi gcia Bakesi Iahc.  Ibysy
by wyescyp iby synfwin aq Pgwwac'n gczfgsgyn, ecp qafcp ibei e lysiegc
Jetyn Bakkn, nylacp wgyfiyceci aq iby Fcgac aq Lewlfiie, eqiys wecpgcr
ac ec gnwecp ngifeiyp 8° 18' N. wei., ecp 156° 30' Y. wacr.,
bep nyyc naty gsac kesn ecp syp nifqqn fnyp ko iby ceigvyn aq ibyny
xesin.  Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy, tflb xysxwymyp, ecp cai dcahgcr bah ia lsypgi
iby syxasin aq wah-lwenn jafscewn, pylgpyp ia qawwah Pgwwac'n iseld.

Ac iby 10ib aq Qyksfeso, 1828, iby Enisaweky exxyesyp aqq Igdaxge, ecp
iaad en rfgpy ecp gciysxsyiys e pynysiys qafcp ac iby gnwecp; tepy bgn
heo ia Vecgdasa, ngrbiyp gi ac iby 12ib gcni., weo etacr iby syyqn
fcigw iby 14ib, ecp cai fcigw iby 20ib pgp by leni eclbas hgibgc iby
kessgys gc iby beskafs aq Vecaf.

Ac iby 23sp, nyvysew aqqglysn hyci safcp iby gnwecp ecp ksafrbi keld
naty fcgtxasieci isgqwyn.  Iby ceigvyn, epaxigcr e noniyt aq pycgewn
ecp yvengacn, syqfnyp ia iedy ibyt ia iby fcwfldo xwely.  Ibgn
etkgrfafn lacpfli wyp ibyt ia kywgyvy ibei iby ceigvyn bep gww-isyeiyp
iby lenieheon, ecp gcpyyp ibyo nyytyp ia qyes ibei Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy bep
laty ia evycry We Xysafny ecp bgn fcqasifceiy lsyh.

Bahyvys, ac iby 26ib, exxyenyp ko naty xsynycin, ecp fcpysniecpgcr ibei
ibyo bep ca syxsgnewn ia qyes, ibyo wyp T. Jelzfgsyai ia iby nlycy aq
iby hsyld.

Ibysy, gc ibsyy as qafs qeibatn aq heiys, kyihyyc iby syyqn aq Xelaf
ecp Vecaf, weo eclbasn, leccacn, xgrn aq wyep ecp gsac, ytkyppyp gc iby
wgto laclsyigacn.  Iby wesry kaei ecp iby hbewys kywacrgcr ia iby
Enisaweky hysy nyci ia ibgn xwely, ecp, cai hgibafi naty pgqqglfwio,
ibygs lsyhn befwyp fx ec eclbas hygrbgcr 1,800 wkn., e ksenn rfc, naty
xgrn aq gsac, ecp iha laxxys nhgvyw-rfcn.

Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy, zfynigacgcr iby ceigvyn, wyescyp iaa ibei We Xysafny,
eqiys wangcr kaib bgn vynnywn ac iby syyqn aq ibgn gnwecp, bep
lacnisfliyp e ntewwys kaei, acwo ia ky wani e nylacp igty.  Hbysy, ca
acy dcyh.

Kfi iby Qsyclb Ravysctyci, qyesgcr ibei Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy hen cai
elzfegciyp hgib Pgwwac'n tavytycin, bep nyci iby nwaax Keoaccegny,
lattecpyp ko Wyraeseci py Isatywgc, ia Vecgdasa, hbglb bep kyyc
nieigacyp ac iby hyni laeni aq Etysgle.  Iby Keoaccegny leni bys eclbas
kyqasy Vecgdasa naty tacibn eqiys iby pyxesifsy aq iby Enisaweky, kfi
qafcp ca cyh palftyci; kfi nieiyp ibei iby neveryn bep synxyliyp iby
tacftyci ia We Xysafny.  Ibei gn iby nfkniecly aq hbei G iawp Lexiegc
Cyta.

"Na," by negp, "ca acy dcahn cah hbysy iby ibgsp vynnyw xysgnbyp ibei
hen lacnisfliyp ko iby lenieheon ac iby gnwecp aq Vecgdasa?"

"Ca acy dcahn."

Lexiegc Cyta negp caibgcr, kfi ngrcyp ia ty ia qawwah bgt gcia iby
wesry newaac.  Iby Cefigwfn necd nyvysew oespn kywah iby hevyn, ecp iby
xecywn hysy axycyp.

G beniycyp ia iby exysifsy, ecp fcpys iby lsfnieigacn aq lasew, lavysyp
hgib qfcrg, noxbacfwyn, ewloacn, tepsyxasyn, ibsafrb tosgepn aq
lbestgcr qgnb--rgsywwyn, rwoxbgngpsg, xatxbysgpyn, pgelaxyn, ecp
bawalycisyn--G sylarcgnyp lysiegc pyksgn ibei iby psern bep cai kyyc
ekwy ia iyes fx--gsac nigssfxn, eclbasn, leccacn, kfwwyin, lexniec
qgiigcrn, iby niyt aq e nbgx, eww akjylin lwyeswo xsavgcr iby hsyld aq
naty vynnyw, ecp cah lesxyiyp hgib wgvgcr qwahysn. Hbgwy G hen waadgcr
ac ibgn pynaweiy nlycy, Lexiegc Cyta negp, gc e nep vagly:

"Lattecpys We Xysafny nyi afi 7ib Pylytkys, 1785, hgib bgn vynnywn We
Kafnnawy ecp iby Enisaweky.  By qgsni leni eclbas ei Kaieco Keo,
vgngiyp iby Qsgycpwo Gnwyn, Cyh Lewypacge, ibyc pgsyliyp bgn lafsny
iahespn Necie Lsfu, ecp xfi gcia Cetafde, acy aq iby Bexeg rsafx.  Ibyc
bgn vynnywn nisfld ac iby fcdcahc syyqn aq Vecgdasa.  Iby Kafnnawy,
hbglb hyci qgsni, sec ersafcp ac iby nafibyswo laeni.  Iby Enisaweky
hyci ia gin bywx, ecp sec ersafcp iaa.  Iby qgsni vynnyw hen pynisaoyp
ewtani gttypgeiywo.  Iby nylacp, nisecpyp fcpys iby hgcp, syngniyp naty
peon.  Iby ceigvyn tepy iby lenieheon hywlaty.  Ibyo gcniewwyp
ibytnywvyn gc iby gnwecp, ecp lacnisfliyp e ntewwys kaei hgib iby
pyksgn aq iby iha wesry acyn.  Naty negwasn nieoyp hgwwgcrwo ei
Vecgdasa; iby aibysn, hyed ecp gww, nyi afi hgib We Xysafny.  Ibyo
pgsyliyp ibygs lafsny iahespn iby Nawatac Gnwecpn, ecp ibysy xysgnbyp,
hgib yvysoibgcr, ac iby hyniyswo laeni aq iby lbgyq gnwecp aq iby
rsafx, kyihyyc Lexyn Pylyxigac ecp Neignqeligac."

"Bah pa oaf dcah ibei?"

"Ko ibgn, ibei G qafcp ac iby nxai hbysy hen iby weni hsyld."

Lexiegc Cyta nbahyp ty e igc-xweiy kam, nietxyp hgib iby Qsyclb estn,
ecp lassapyp ko iby newi heiys.  By axycyp gi, ecp G neh e kfcpwy aq
xexysn, oywwah kfi nigww syepekwy.

Ibyo hysy iby gcnisfligacn aq iby cevew tgcgniys ia Lattecpys We
Xysafny, eccaieiyp gc iby tesrgc gc Wafgn MVG'n becphsgigcr.

"Eb! gi gn e qgcy pyeib qas e negwas!" negp Lexiegc Cyta, ei weni.  "E
lasew iatk tedyn e zfgyi rsevy; ecp G isfni ibei G ecp to latsepyn hgww
qgcp ca aibys."



LBEXIYS MGM

IASSYN NISEGIN

Pfsgcr iby cgrbi aq iby 27ib as 28ib aq Pylytkys, iby Cefigwfn wyqi iby
nbasyn aq Vecgdasa hgib rsyei nxyyp.  Bys lafsny hen nafib-hyniyswo,
ecp gc ibsyy peon nby bep racy avys iby 750 wyerfyn ibei nyxeseiyp gi
qsat We Xysafny'n rsafx ecp iby nafib-yeni xagci aq Xexfe.

Yeswo ac iby 1ni aq Jecfeso, 1863, Lacnygw jagcyp ty ac iby xweiqast.

"Teniys, hgww oaf xystgi ty ia hgnb oaf e bexxo Cyh Oyes?"

"Hbei!  Lacnygw; ymeliwo en gq G hen ei Xesgn gc to nifpo ei iby Jespgc
pyn Xweciyn?  Hyww, G ellyxi oafs raap hgnbyn, ecp ibecd oaf qas ibyt.
Acwo, G hgww end oaf hbei oaf tyec ko e `Bexxo Cyh Oyes' fcpys afs
lgslftnieclyn?  Pa oaf tyec iby oyes ibei hgww ksgcr fn ia iby ycp aq
afs gtxsgnactyci, as iby oyes ibei nyyn fn lacigcfy ibgn nisecry
vaoery?"

"Syewwo, G pa cai dcah bah ia ecnhys, teniys.  Hy esy nfsy ia nyy
lfsgafn ibgcrn, ecp qas iby weni iha tacibn hy bevy cai bep igty qas
pfwwcynn.  Iby weni tesvyw gn ewheon iby tani eniacgnbgcr; ecp, gq hy
lacigcfy ibgn xsarsynngac, G pa cai dcah bah gi hgww ycp.  Gi gn to
axgcgac ibei hy nbeww cyvys eregc nyy iby wgdy.  G ibgcd ibyc, hgib ca
aqqycly ia teniys, ibei e bexxo oyes hafwp ky acy gc hbglb hy lafwp nyy
yvysoibgcr."

Ac 2cp Jecfeso hy bep tepy 11,340 tgwyn, as 5,250 Qsyclb wyerfyn, ngcly
afs niesigcr-xagci gc iby Jexec Nyen.  Kyqasy iby nbgx'n byep nisyilbyp
iby pecrysafn nbasyn aq iby lasew nye, ac iby casib-yeni laeni aq
Efnisewge.  Afs kaei weo ewacr naty tgwyn qsat iby sypafkiekwy kecd ac
hbglb Laad'n vynnyw hen wani, 10ib Jfcy, 1770.  Iby kaei gc hbglb Laad
hen nisfld ac e sald, ecp, gq gi pgp cai ngcd, gi hen ahgcr ia e xgyly
aq lasew ibei hen ksadyc ko iby nbald, ecp qgmyp ginywq gc iby ksadyc
dyyw.

G bep hgnbyp ia vgngi iby syyq, 360 wyerfyn wacr, eregcni hbglb iby
nye, ewheon safrb, ksady hgib rsyei vgawycly, hgib e cagny wgdy
ibfcpys.  Kfi jfni ibyc iby gclwgcyp xwecyn psyh iby Cefigwfn pahc ia e
rsyei pyxib, ecp G lafwp nyy caibgcr aq iby bgrb lasew hewwn.  G bep ia
laciyci tonywq hgib iby pgqqysyci nxylgtycn aq qgnb ksafrbi fx ko iby
cyin.  G sytesdyp, etacr aibysn, naty rystacn, e nxylgyn aq teldysyw en
wesry en e ifcco, hgib kwfgnb ngpyn, ecp nisgxyp hgib isecnvysny kecpn,
ibei pgnexxyes hgib iby ecgtew'n wgqy.

Ibyny qgnb qawwahyp fn gc nbaewn, ecp qfscgnbyp fn hgib vyso pywgleiy
qaap. Hy iaad ewna e wesry cftkys aq rgwi-byepn, ekafi acy ecp e bewq
gclbyn wacr, ienigcr wgdy pason; ecp qwogcr xosexypn wgdy nfktesgcy
nhewwahn, hbglb, gc pesd cgrbin, wgrbi ewiysceiywo iby egs ecp heiys
hgib ibygs xbanxbasynlyci wgrbi. Etacr iby tawwfnln ecp uaaxboiyn, G
qafcp gc iby tynbyn aq iby cyi nyvysew nxylgyn aq ewloacesgecn, ylbgcg,
bettysn, nxfsn, pgewn, lysgiyn, ecp boewwyey. Iby qwase hen syxsynyciyp
ko kyefigqfw qwaeigcr nyehyypn, wetgcesgey, ecp telsaloniyn,
gtxsyrceiyp hgib iby tflgwery ibei isecnfpyn ibsafrb ibygs xasyn; ecp
etacr hbglb G reibysyp ec eptgsekwy Cyteniate Rywgcgesagn, ibei hen
lwennyp etacr iby ceifsew lfsgangigyn aq iby tfnyft.

Iha peon eqiys lsanngcr iby lasew nye, 4ib Jecfeso, hy ngrbiyp iby
Xexfec laenin.  Ac ibgn allengac, Lexiegc Cyta gcqastyp ty ibei bgn
gciycigac hen ia ryi gcia iby Gcpgec Alyec ko iby Nisegi aq Iassyn.
Bgn lattfcgleigac ycpyp ibysy.

Iby Iassyn Nisegin esy cyeswo ibgsio-qafs wyerfyn hgpy; kfi ibyo esy
aknisfliyp ko ec gccftysekwy zfecigio aq gnwecpn, gnwyin, ksyedysn, ecp
saldn, ibei tedy gin cevgreigac ewtani gtxseliglekwy; na ibei Lexiegc
Cyta iaad eww cyypqfw xsylefigacn ia lsann ibyt.  Iby Cefigwfn,
qwaeigcr kyihgmi hgcp ecp heiys, hyci ei e tapyseiy xely.  Bys nlsyh,
wgdy e lyielyec'n iegw, kyei iby hevyn nwahwo.

Xsaqgigcr ko ibgn, G ecp to iha latxecgacn hyci fx ac ia iby pynysiyp
xweiqast.  Kyqasy fn hen iby niyysntec'n lery, ecp G ymxyliyp ibei
Lexiegc Cyta hen ibysy pgsyligcr iby lafsny aq iby Cefigwfn.  G bep
kyqasy ty iby ymlywwyci lbesin aq iby Nisegin aq Iassyn, ecp G
lacnfwiyp ibyt eiiycigvywo.  Safcp iby Cefigwfn iby nye penbyp
qfsgafnwo.  Iby lafsny aq iby hevyn, ibei hyci qsat nafib-yeni ia
casib-hyni ei iby seiy aq iha ecp e bewq tgwyn, ksady ac iby lasew ibei
nbahyp ginywq bysy ecp ibysy.

"Ibgn gn e kep nye!" sytesdyp Cyp Wecp.

"Pyiyniekwy gcpyyp, ecp acy ibei payn cai nfgi e kaei wgdy iby
Cefigwfn."

"Iby Lexiegc tfni ky vyso nfsy aq bgn safiy, qas G nyy ibysy xgylyn aq
lasew ibei hafwp pa qas gin dyyw gq gi acwo iaflbyp ibyt nwgrbiwo."

Gcpyyp iby ngifeigac hen pecrysafn, kfi iby Cefigwfn nyytyp ia nwgpy
wgdy tergl aqq ibyny saldn.  Gi pgp cai qawwah iby safiyn aq iby
Enisaweky ecp iby Uywyy ymeliwo, qas ibyo xsavyp qeiew ia Pftaci
p'Fsvgwwy. Gi kasy tasy casibhespn, laeniyp iby Gnwecpn aq Tfsseo, ecp
lety keld ia iby nafib-hyni iahespn Lftkyswecp Xennery.  G ibafrbi gi
hen ragcr ia xenn gi ko, hbyc, ragcr keld ia casib-hyni, gi hyci
ibsafrb e wesry zfecigio aq gnwecpn ecp gnwyin wgiiwy dcahc, iahespn
iby Gnwecp Nafcp ecp Lecew Tefvegn.

G hacpysyp gq Lexiegc Cyta, qaawgnbwo gtxsfpyci, hafwp niyys bgn vynnyw
gcia ibei xenn hbysy Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy'n iha lasvyiiyn iaflbyp; hbyc,
nhysvgcr eregc, ecp lfiigcr nisegrbi ibsafrb ia iby hyni, by niyysyp
qas iby Gnwecp aq Rgwkae.

Gi hen ibyc ibsyy gc iby eqiyscaac.  Iby igpy kyrec ia sylypy, kygcr
zfgiy qfww.  Iby Cefigwfn exxsaelbyp iby gnwecp, ibei G nigww neh, hgib
gin sytesdekwy kaspys aq nlsyh-xgcyn. By niaap aqq gi ei ekafi iha
tgwyn pgnieci.  Nfppycwo e nbald avysibsyh ty.  Iby Cefigwfn jfni
iaflbyp e sald, ecp nieoyp gttavekwy, weogcr wgrbiwo ia xasi ngpy.

Hbyc G sany, G xyslygvyp Lexiegc Cyta ecp bgn wgyfiyceci ac iby
xweiqast.  Ibyo hysy ymetgcgcr iby ngifeigac aq iby vynnyw, ecp
ymlbecrgcr haspn gc ibygs gclatxsybycngkwy pgewyli.

Nby hen ngifeiyp ibfn:  Iha tgwyn, ac iby nieskaesp ngpy, exxyesyp
Rgwkae, nisyilbgcr qsat casib ia hyni wgdy ec gttycny est.  Iahespn iby
nafib ecp yeni naty lasew nbahyp ginywq, wyqi ko iby ykk.  Hy bep sfc
ersafcp, ecp gc acy aq ibany nyen hbysy iby igpyn esy tgppwgcr--e nasso
teiiys qas iby qwaeigcr aq iby Cefigwfn.  Bahyvys, iby vynnyw bep cai
nfqqysyp, qas bys dyyw hen nawgpwo jagcyp.  Kfi, gq nby lafwp cygibys
rwgpy aqq cas tavy, nby sec iby sgnd aq kygcr qas yvys qeniycyp ia
ibyny saldn, ecp ibyc Lexiegc Cyta'n nfktesgcy vynnyw hafwp ky pacy qas.

G hen syqwyligcr ibfn, hbyc iby Lexiegc, laaw ecp lewt, ewheon teniys
aq bgtnywq, exxsaelbyp ty.

"Ec ellgpyci?"  G endyp.

"Ca; ec gclgpyci."

"Kfi ec gclgpyci ibei hgww akwgry oaf xysbexn ia kylaty ec gcbekgieci
aq ibgn wecp qsat hbglb oaf qwyy?"

Lexiegc Cyta waadyp ei ty lfsgafnwo, ecp tepy e cyreigvy rynifsy, en
tflb en ia neo ibei caibgcr hafwp qasly bgt ia nyi qaai ac iysse qgste
eregc.  Ibyc by negp:

"Kyngpyn, T. Esaccem, iby Cefigwfn gn cai wani; gi hgww lesso oaf oyi
gcia iby tgpni aq iby tesvywn aq iby alyec.  Afs vaoery gn acwo kyrfc,
ecp G pa cai hgnb ia ky pyxsgvyp na naac aq iby bacafs aq oafs latxeco."

"Bahyvys, Lexiegc Cyta," G syxwgyp, hgibafi caiglgcr iby gsacglew ifsc
aq bgn xbseny, "iby Cefigwfn sec ersafcp gc axyc nye.  Cah iby igpyn
esy cai nisacr gc iby Xelgqgl; ecp, gq oaf leccai wgrbiyc iby Cefigwfn,
G pa cai nyy bah gi hgww ky sygcqweiyp."

"Iby igpyn esy cai nisacr gc iby Xelgqgl:  oaf esy sgrbi ibysy,
Xsaqynnas; kfi gc Iassyn Nisegin acy qgcpn nigww e pgqqysycly aq e oesp
ecp e bewq kyihyyc iby wyvyw aq bgrb ecp wah nyen.  Ia-peo gn 4ib
Jecfeso, ecp gc qgvy peon iby taac hgww ky qfww.  Cah, G nbeww ky vyso
tflb eniacgnbyp gq ibei neiywwgiy payn cai segny ibyny tennyn aq heiys
nfqqglgyciwo, ecp sycpys ty e nysvgly ibei G nbafwp ky gcpykiyp ia bys
qas."

Bevgcr negp ibgn, Lexiegc Cyta, qawwahyp ko bgn wgyfiyceci, sypynlycpyp
ia iby gciysgas aq iby Cefigwfn.  En ia iby vynnyw, gi tavyp cai, ecp
hen gttavekwy, en gq iby lasewwgcy xawoxg bep ewsyepo hewwyp gi fx hgib
ibygs gc pynisfligkwy lytyci.

"Hyww, ngs?" negp Cyp Wecp, hba lety fx ia ty eqiys iby pyxesifsy aq
iby Lexiegc.

"Hyww, qsgycp Cyp, hy hgww hegi xeigyciwo qas iby igpy ac iby 9ib
gcnieci; qas gi exxyesn ibei iby taac hgww bevy iby raapcynn ia xfi gi
aqq eregc."

"Syewwo?"

"Syewwo."

"Ecp ibgn Lexiegc gn cai ragcr ia leni eclbas ei eww ngcly iby igpy
hgww nfqqgly?" negp Lacnygw, ngtxwo.

Iby Lecepgec waadyp ei Lacnygw, ibyc nbsfrryp bgn nbafwpysn.

"Ngs, oaf teo kywgyvy ty hbyc G iyww oaf ibei ibgn xgyly aq gsac hgww
cevgreiy cygibys ac cas fcpys iby nye eregc; gi gn acwo qgi ia ky nawp
qas gin hygrbi.  G ibgcd, ibysyqasy, ibei iby igty ben laty ia xesi
latxeco hgib Lexiegc Cyta."

"Qsgycp Cyp, G pa cai pynxegs aq ibgn niafi Cefigwfn, en oaf pa; ecp gc
qafs peon hy nbeww dcah hbei ia bawp ia ac iby Xelgqgl igpyn.  Kyngpyn,
qwgrbi tgrbi ky xanngkwy gq hy hysy gc ngrbi aq iby Ycrwgnb as
Xsavyclew laeni; kfi ac iby Xexfec nbasyn, gi gn ecaibys ibgcr; ecp gi
hgww ky igty ycafrb ia laty ia ibei ymisytgio gq iby Cefigwfn payn cai
sylavys ginywq eregc, hbglb G waad fxac en e rsevy yvyci."

"Kfi pa ibyo dcah, ei wyeni, bah ia eli lgslftnxyliwo?  Ibysy gn ec
gnwecp; ac ibei gnwecp ibysy esy isyyn; fcpys ibany isyyn, iyssynisgew
ecgtewn, kyesysn aq lfiwyin ecp saeni kyyq, ia hbglb G hafwp hgwwgcrwo
rgvy e isgew."

"Gc ibgn, qsgycp Cyp gn sgrbi," negp Lacnygw, "ecp G ersyy hgib bgt.
Lafwp cai teniys akiegc xystgnngac qsat bgn qsgycp Lexiegc Cyta ia xfi
fn ac wecp, gq acwo na en cai ia wany iby bekgi aq isyepgcr ac iby
nawgp xesin aq afs xwecyi?"

"G lec end bgt, kfi by hgww syqfny."

"Hgww teniys sgnd gi?" endyp Lacnygw, "ecp hy nbeww dcah bah ia sywo
fxac iby Lexiegc'n etgekgwgio."

Ia to rsyei nfsxsgny, Lexiegc Cyta revy ty iby xystgnngac G endyp qas,
ecp by revy gi vyso ersyyekwo, hgibafi yvyc ymeligcr qsat ty e xsatgny
ia syifsc ia iby vynnyw; kfi qwgrbi elsann Cyh Rfgcye tgrbi ky vyso
xysgwafn, ecp G nbafwp cai bevy lafcnywwyp Cyp Wecp ia eiiytxi gi.
Kyiiys ia ky e xsgnacys ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn ibec ia qeww gcia iby
becpn aq iby ceigvyn.

Ei ygrbi a'lwald, estyp hgib rfcn ecp beilbyin, hy rai aqq iby
Cefigwfn.  Iby nye hen xsyiio lewt; e nwgrbi ksyyuy kwyh ac wecp.
Lacnygw ecp G sahgcr, hy nxyp ewacr zfgldwo, ecp Cyp niyysyp gc iby
nisegrbi xennery ibei iby ksyedysn wyqi kyihyyc ibyt.  Iby kaei hen
hyww becpwyp, ecp tavyp sexgpwo.

Cyp Wecp lafwp cai synisegc bgn jao.  By hen wgdy e xsgnacys ibei bep
ynlexyp qsat xsgnac, ecp dcyh cai ibei gi hen cylynneso ia sy-yciys gi.

"Tyei!  Hy esy ragcr ia yei naty tyei; ecp hbei tyei!" by syxwgyp.
"Syew rety! ca, ksyep, gcpyyp."

"G pa cai neo ibei qgnb gn cai raap; hy tfni cai ekfny gi; kfi e xgyly
aq qsynb vycgnac, rsgwwyp ac wgvy laewn, hgww ersyyekwo veso afs
aspgceso lafsny."

"Rwfiiac!" negp Lacnygw, "by tedyn to tafib heiys."

"Gi sytegcn ia ky nyyc," G negp, "gq ibyny qasynin esy qfww aq rety,
ecp gq iby rety gn cai nflb en hgww bfci iby bfciys bgtnywq."

"Hyww negp, T. Esaccem," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, hbany iyyib nyytyp
nbesxycyp wgdy iby ypry aq e beilbyi; "kfi G hgww yei igrys--wagc aq
igrys--gq ibysy gn ca aibys zfepsfxyp ac ibgn gnwecp."

"Qsgycp Cyp gn fcyeno ekafi gi," negp Lacnygw.

"Hbeiyvys gi teo ky," lacigcfyp Cyp Wecp, "yvyso ecgtew hgib qafs xehn
hgibafi qyeibysn, as hgib iha xehn hgibafi qyeibysn, hgww ky newfiyp ko
to qgsni nbai."

"Vyso hyww!  Teniys Wecp'n gtxsfpyclyn esy kyrgccgcr."

"Cyvys qyes, T. Esaccem," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec; "G pa cai heci
ihycio-qgvy tgcfiyn ia aqqys oaf e pgnb, aq to nasi."

Ei bewq-xeni ygrbi iby Cefigwfn kaei sec naqiwo ersafcp ac e byevo
necp, eqiys bevgcr bexxgwo xennyp iby lasew syyq ibei nfssafcpn iby
Gnwecp aq Rgwkae.



LBEXIYS MM

E QYH PEON AC WECP

G hen tflb gtxsynnyp ac iaflbgcr wecp.  Cyp Wecp isgyp iby nagw hgib
bgn qyyi, en gq ia iedy xannynngac aq gi.  Bahyvys, gi hen acwo iha
tacibn kyqasy ibei hy bep kylaty, ellaspgcr ia Lexiegc Cyta,
"xennycrysn ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn," kfi, gc syewgio, xsgnacysn aq gin
lattecpys.

Gc e qyh tgcfiyn hy hysy hgibgc tfndyi-nbai aq iby laeni.  Iby hbawy
basguac hen bgppyc kybgcp e kyefigqfw lfsiegc aq qasynin.  Ycastafn
isyyn, iby isfcdn aq hbglb eiiegcyp e bygrbi aq 200 qyyi, hysy igyp ia
yelb aibys ko reswecpn aq kgcphyyp, syew ceifsew bettaldn, hbglb e
wgrbi ksyyuy saldyp.  Ibyo hysy tgtanen, qgrn, bgkgnlg, ecp xewt isyyn,
tgcrwyp iaryibys gc xsaqfngac; ecp fcpys iby nbywiys aq ibygs vyspeci
vefwi rsyh aslbgpn, wyrftgcafn xwecin, ecp qyscn.

Kfi, hgibafi caiglgcr eww ibyny kyefigqfw nxylgtycn aq Xexfec qwase,
iby Lecepgec ekecpacyp iby ersyyekwy qas iby fnyqfw.  By pgnlavysyp e
lala-isyy, kyei pahc naty aq iby qsfgi, ksady ibyt, ecp hy psfcd iby
tgwd ecp eiy iby cfi hgib e neignqeligac ibei xsaiyniyp eregcni iby
aspgceso qaap ac iby Cefigwfn.

"Ymlywwyci!" negp Cyp Wecp.

"Ymzfgngiy!" syxwgyp Lacnygw.

"Ecp G pa cai ibgcd," negp iby Lecepgec, "ibei by hafwp akjyli ia afs
gcisapflgcr e lesra aq lala-cfin ac kaesp."

"G pa cai ibgcd by hafwp, kfi by hafwp cai ieniy ibyt."

"Na tflb iby hasny qas bgt," negp Lacnygw.

"Ecp na tflb iby kyiiys qas fn," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp.  "Ibysy hgww ky tasy
qas fn."

"Acy hasp acwo, Teniys Wecp," G negp ia iby besxaacys, hba hen
kyrgccgcr ia severy ecaibys lala-cfi isyy.  "Lala-cfin esy raap ibgcrn,
kfi kyqasy qgwwgcr iby lecay hgib ibyt gi hafwp ky hgny ia sylaccagisy
ecp nyy gq iby gnwecp payn cai xsapfly naty nfkniecly cai wynn fnyqfw.
Qsynb vyryiekwyn hafwp ky hywlaty ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn."

"Teniys gn sgrbi," syxwgyp Lacnygw; "ecp G xsaxany ia synysvy ibsyy
xwelyn gc afs vynnyw, acy qas qsfgin, iby aibys qas vyryiekwyn, ecp iby
ibgsp qas iby vycgnac, aq hbglb G bevy cai oyi nyyc iby ntewwyni
nxylgtyc."

"Lacnygw, hy tfni cai pynxegs," negp iby Lecepgec.

"Wyi fn lacigcfy," G syifscyp, "ecp wgy gc hegi.  Ewibafrb iby gnwecp
nyytn fcgcbekgiyp, gi tgrbi nigww laciegc naty gcpgvgpfewn ibei hafwp
ky wynn besp ibec hy ac iby ceifsy aq rety."

"Ba! ba!" negp Cyp Wecp, tavgcr bgn jehn ngrcgqgleciwo.

"Hyww, Cyp!" negp Lacnygw.

"To hasp!" syifscyp iby Lecepgec, "G kyrgc ia fcpysniecp iby lbestn aq
ecibsaxaxbero."

"Cyp!  Cyp! hbei esy oaf neogcr?  Oaf, e tec-yeiys? G nbafwp cai qyyw
neqy hgib oaf, ynxylgewwo en G nbesy oafs lekgc.  G tgrbi xysbexn hedy
acy peo ia qgcp tonywq bewq pyvafsyp."

"Qsgycp Lacnygw, G wgdy oaf tflb, kfi cai ycafrb ia yei oaf
fccylynnesgwo."

"G hafwp cai isfni oaf," syxwgyp Lacnygw.  "Kfi ycafrb.  Hy tfni
eknawfiywo ksgcr pahc naty rety ia neignqo ibgn leccgkew, as ywny acy
aq ibyny qgcy tascgcrn, teniys hgww qgcp acwo xgylyn aq bgn nysveci ia
nysvy bgt."

Hbgwy hy hysy iewdgcr ibfn, hy hysy xycyiseigcr iby natksy eslbyn aq
iby qasyni, ecp qas iha bafsn hy nfsvyoyp gi gc eww pgsyligacn.

Lbecly syhespyp afs nyeslb qas yeiekwy vyryiekwyn, ecp acy aq iby tani
fnyqfw xsapflin aq iby isaxglew uacyn qfscgnbyp fn hgib xsylgafn qaap
ibei hy tgnnyp ac kaesp.  G hafwp nxyed aq iby ksyep-qsfgi isyy, vyso
ekfcpeci gc iby gnwecp aq Rgwkae; ecp G sytesdyp lbgyqwo iby vesgyio
pynigifiy aq nyypn, hbglb kyesn gc Teweoe iby cety aq "sgte."

Cyp Wecp dcyh ibyny qsfgin hyww.  By bep ewsyepo yeiyc teco pfsgcr bgn
cftysafn vaoeryn, ecp by dcyh bah ia xsyxesy iby yeiekwy nfkniecly.
Tasyavys, iby ngrbi aq ibyt ymlgiyp bgt, ecp by lafwp laciegc bgtnywq
ca wacrys.

"Teniys," by negp, "G nbeww pgy gq G pa cai ieniy e wgiiwy aq ibgn
ksyep-qsfgi xgy."

"Ieniy gi, qsgycp Cyp--ieniy gi en oaf heci.  Hy esy bysy ia tedy
ymxysgtycin--tedy ibyt."

"Gi hac'i iedy wacr," negp iby Lecepgec.

Ecp, xsavgpyp hgib e wycigw, by wgrbiyp e qgsy aq pyep haap ibei
lseldwyp jaoafnwo.  Pfsgcr ibgn igty, Lacnygw ecp G lbany iby kyni
qsfgin aq iby ksyep-qsfgi. Naty bep cai ibyc eiiegcyp e nfqqglgyci
pyrsyy aq teifsgio; ecp ibygs ibgld ndgc lavysyp e hbgiy kfi seibys
qgksafn xfwx.  Aibysn, iby rsyeiys cftkys oywwah ecp ryweigcafn, hegiyp
acwo ia ky xgldyp.

Ibyny qsfgin yclwanyp ca dyscyw.  Lacnygw ksafrbi e pauyc ia Cyp Wecp,
hba xwelyp ibyt ac e laew qgsy, eqiys bevgcr lfi ibyt gc ibgld nwglyn,
ecp hbgwy pagcr ibgn syxyeigcr:

"Oaf hgww nyy, teniys, bah raap ibgn ksyep gn.  Tasy na hbyc acy ben
kyyc pyxsgvyp aq gi na wacr.  Gi gn cai yvyc ksyep," eppyp by, "kfi e
pywgleiy xeniso.  Oaf bevy yeiyc cacy, teniys?"

"Ca, Cyp."

"Vyso hyww, xsyxesy oafsnywq qas e jfglo ibgcr.  Gq oaf pa cai laty qas
tasy, G et ca wacrys iby dgcr aq besxaacysn."

Eqiys naty tgcfiyn, iby xesi aq iby qsfgin ibei hen ymxanyp ia iby qgsy
hen latxwyiywo saeniyp.  Iby gciysgas waadyp wgdy e hbgiy xenio, e nasi
aq naqi lsftk, iby qwevafs aq hbglb hen wgdy ibei aq ec esiglbady.

Gi tfni ky lacqynnyp ibgn ksyep hen ymlywwyci, ecp G eiy aq gi hgib
rsyei sywgnb.

"Hbei igty gn gi cah?" endyp iby Lecepgec.

"Iha a'lwald ei wyeni," syxwgyp Lacnygw.

"Bah igty qwgyn ac qgst rsafcp!" ngrbyp Cyp Wecp.

"Wyi fn ky aqq," syxwgyp Lacnygw.

Hy syifscyp ibsafrb iby qasyni, ecp latxwyiyp afs lawwyligac ko e segp
fxac iby lekkery-xewtn, ibei hy reibysyp qsat iby iaxn aq iby isyyn,
wgiiwy kyecn ibei G sylarcgnyp en iby "eksaf" aq iby Teweon, ecp oetn
aq e nfxysgas zfewgio.

Hy hysy waepyp hbyc hy syelbyp iby kaei.  Kfi Cyp Wecp pgp cai qgcp bgn
xsavgngacn nfqqglgyci.  Qeiy, bahyvys, qevafsyp fn.  Jfni en hy hysy
xfnbgcr aqq, by xyslygvyp nyvysew isyyn, qsat ihycio-qgvy ia ibgsio
qyyi bgrb, e nxylgyn aq xewt-isyy.

Ei weni, ei qgvy a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr, waepyp hgib afs sglbyn, hy
zfgiiyp iby nbasy, ecp bewq ec bafs eqiys hy begwyp iby Cefigwfn.  Ca
acy exxyesyp ac afs essgvew.  Iby ycastafn gsac-xweiyp lowgcpys nyytyp
pynysiyp.  Iby xsavgngacn ytkesdyp, G pynlycpyp ia to lbetkys, ecp
eqiys nfxxys nwyxi nafcpwo.

Iby cymi peo, 6ib Jecfeso, caibgcr cyh ac kaesp.  Cai e nafcp gcngpy,
cai e ngrc aq wgqy.  Iby kaei syniyp ewacr iby ypry, gc iby nety xwely
gc hbglb hy bep wyqi gi.  Hy synawvyp ia syifsc ia iby gnwecp.  Cyp
Wecp baxyp ia ky tasy qasifceiy ibec ac iby peo kyqasy hgib syresp ia
iby bfci, ecp hgnbyp ia vgngi ecaibys xesi aq iby qasyni.

Ei pehc hy nyi aqq.  Iby kaei, lessgyp ac ko iby hevyn ibei qwahyp ia
nbasy, syelbyp iby gnwecp gc e qyh tgcfiyn.

Hy wecpyp, ecp, ibgcdgcr ibei gi hen kyiiys ia rgvy gc ia iby Lecepgec,
hy qawwahyp Cyp Wecp, hbany wacr wgtkn ibsyeiycyp ia pgniecly fn.  By
hafcp fx iby laeni iahespn iby hyni:  ibyc, qaspgcr naty iassycin, by
regcyp iby bgrb xwegc ibei hen kaspysyp hgib eptgsekwy qasynin.  Naty
dgcrqgnbysn hysy setkwgcr ewacr iby heiys-lafsnyn, kfi ibyo hafwp cai
wyi ibytnywvyn ky exxsaelbyp.  Ibygs lgslftnxyligac xsavyp ia ty ibei
ibyny kgspn dcyh hbei ia ymxyli qsat kgxypn aq afs nxylgyn, ecp G
laclwfpyp ibei, gq iby gnwecp hen cai gcbekgiyp, ei wyeni bftec kygcrn
allengacewwo qsyzfyciyp gi.

Eqiys lsanngcr e seibys wesry xsegsgy, hy essgvyp ei iby ndgsin aq e
wgiiwy haap ibei hen ycwgvycyp ko iby nacrn ecp qwgrbi aq e wesry
cftkys aq kgspn.

"Ibysy esy acwo kgspn," negp Lacnygw.

"Kfi ibyo esy yeiekwy," syxwgyp iby besxaacys.

"G pa cai ersyy hgib oaf, qsgycp Cyp, qas G nyy acwo xessain ibysy."

"Qsgycp Lacnygw," negp Cyp, rsevywo, "iby xessai gn wgdy xbyeneci ia
ibany hba bevy caibgcr ywny."

"Ecp," G eppyp, "ibgn kgsp, nfgiekwo xsyxesyp, gn hasib dcgqy ecp qasd."

Gcpyyp, fcpys iby ibgld qawgery aq ibgn haap, e haswp aq xessain hysy
qwogcr qsat kseclb ia kseclb, acwo cyypgcr e lesyqfw ypfleigac ia nxyed
iby bftec wecrfery.  Qas iby tatyci, ibyo hysy lbeiiysgcr hgib xessain
aq eww lawafsn, ecp rsevy laldeiaan, hba nyytyp ia typgieiy fxac naty
xbgwanaxbglew xsakwyt, hbgwni ksgwwgeci syp wasgyn xennyp wgdy e xgyly
aq kfcigcr lessgyp eheo ko iby ksyyuy, xexfecn, hgib iby qgcyni eufsy
lawafsn, ecp gc eww e vesgyio aq hgcryp ibgcrn tani lbestgcr ia kybawp,
kfi qyh yeiekwy.

Bahyvys, e kgsp xylfwges ia ibyny wecpn, ecp hbglb ben cyvys xennyp iby
wgtgin aq iby Essah ecp Xexfec gnwecpn, hen hecigcr gc ibgn lawwyligac.
Kfi qasifcy synysvyp gi qas ty kyqasy wacr.

Eqiys xenngcr ibsafrb e tapyseiywo ibgld laxny, hy qafcp e xwegc
aknisfliyp hgib kfnbyn.  G neh ibyc ibany tercgqglyci kgspn, iby
pgnxangigac aq hbany wacr qyeibysn akwgryn ibyt ia qwo eregcni iby
hgcp.  Ibygs fcpfweigcr qwgrbi, rselyqfw eysgew lfsvyn, ecp iby nbepgcr
aq ibygs lawafsn, eiiseliyp ecp lbestyp acy'n waadn.  G bep ca isafkwy
gc sylarcgngcr ibyt.

"Kgspn aq xesepgny!"  G ymlwegtyp.

Iby Teweon, hba lesso ac e rsyei isepy gc ibyny kgspn hgib iby Lbgcyny,
bevy nyvysew tyecn ibei hy lafwp cai ytxwao qas iedgcr ibyt.  Natyigtyn
ibyo xfi ncesyn ac iby iax aq bgrb isyyn ibei iby kgspn aq xesepgny
xsyqys ia qsyzfyci.  Natyigtyn ibyo leilb ibyt hgib e vgnlafn kgspwgty
ibei xesewonyn ibygs tavytycin.  Ibyo yvyc ra na qes en ia xagnac iby
qafciegcn ibei iby kgspn rycysewwo psgcd qsat.  Kfi hy hysy akwgryp ia
qgsy ei ibyt pfsgcr qwgrbi, hbglb revy fn qyh lbeclyn ia ksgcr ibyt
pahc; ecp, gcpyyp, hy vegcwo ymbefniyp acy bewq afs ettfcgigac.

Ekafi ywyvyc a'lwald gc iby tascgcr, iby qgsni secry aq tafciegcn ibei
qast iby lycisy aq iby gnwecp hen isevysnyp, ecp hy bep dgwwyp caibgcr.
Bfcrys psavy fn ac.  Iby bfciysn bep sywgyp ac iby xsapflin aq iby
lbeny, ecp ibyo hysy hsacr.  Bexxgwo Lacnygw, ia bgn rsyei nfsxsgny,
tepy e pafkwy nbai ecp nylfsyp ksyedqeni.  By ksafrbi pahc e hbgiy
xgryac ecp e haap-xgryac, hbglb, lwyvyswo xwfldyp ecp nfnxycpyp qsat e
ndyhys, hen saeniyp kyqasy e syp qgsy aq pyep haap.  Hbgwy ibyny
gciysynigcr kgspn hysy laadgcr, Cyp xsyxesyp iby qsfgi aq iby
ksyep-isyy. Ibyc iby haap-xgryacn hysy pyvafsyp ia iby kacyn, ecp
pylwesyp ymlywwyci.  Iby cfityr, hgib hbglb ibyo esy gc iby bekgi aq
nifqqgcr ibygs lsaxn, qwevafsn ibygs qwynb ecp sycpysn gi pywglgafn
yeigcr.

"Cah, Cyp, hbei pa oaf tgnn cah?"

"Naty qafs-qaaiyp rety, T. Esaccem.  Eww ibyny xgryacn esy acwo
ngpy-pgnbyn ecp isgqwyn; ecp fcigw G bevy dgwwyp ec ecgtew hgib lfiwyin
G nbeww cai ky laciyci."

"Cas G, Cyp, gq G pa cai leilb e kgsp aq xesepgny."

"Wyi fn lacigcfy bfcigcr," syxwgyp Lacnygw.  "Wyi fn ra iahespn iby
nye.  Hy bevy essgvyp ei iby qgsni pylwgvgigyn aq iby tafciegcn, ecp G
ibgcd hy bep kyiiys syregc iby syrgac aq qasynin."

Ibei hen nycngkwy epvgly, ecp hen qawwahyp afi.  Eqiys hewdgcr qas acy
bafs hy bep eiiegcyp e qasyni aq nera-isyyn. Naty gcaqqycngvy nysxycin
rwgpyp eheo qsat fn.  Iby kgspn aq xesepgny qwyp ei afs exxsaelb, ecp
isfwo G pynxegsyp aq ryiigcr cyes acy hbyc Lacnygw, hba hen hewdgcr gc
qsaci, nfppycwo kyci pahc, fiiysyp e isgftxbew lso, ecp lety keld ia ty
ksgcrgcr e tercgqglyci nxylgtyc.

"Eb! kseva, Lacnygw!"

"Teniys gn vyso raap."

"Ca, to kao; oaf bevy tepy ec ymlywwyci nisady.  Iedy acy aq ibyny
wgvgcr kgspn, ecp lesso gi gc oafs becp."

"Gq teniys hgww ymetgcy gi, by hgww nyy ibei G bevy cai pynysvyp rsyei
tysgi."

"Hbo, Lacnygw?"

"Kylefny ibgn kgsp gn en psfcd en e zfegw."

"Psfcd!"

"Oyn, ngs; psfcd hgib iby cfityrn ibei gi pyvafsyp fcpys iby
cfityr-isyy, fcpys hbglb G qafcp gi.  Nyy, qsgycp Cyp, nyy iby
tacnisafn yqqylin aq gciytxysecly!"

"Ko Javy!" ymlwegtyp iby Lecepgec, "kylefny G bevy psfcd rgc qas iha
tacibn, oaf tfni cyypn syxsaelb ty!"

Bahyvys, G ymetgcyp iby lfsgafn kgsp.  Lacnygw hen sgrbi.  Iby kgsp,
psfcd hgib iby jfgly, hen zfgiy xahyswynn.  Gi lafwp cai qwo; gi lafwp
bespwo hewd.

Ibgn kgsp kywacryp ia iby tani kyefigqfw aq iby ygrbi nxylgyn ibei esy
qafcp gc Xexfe ecp gc iby cygrbkafsgcr gnwecpn.  Gi hen iby "wesry
ytysewp kgsp, iby tani sesy dgcp." Gi tyenfsyp ibsyy qyyi gc wycrib.
Gin byep hen latxeseigvywo nteww, gin yoyn xwelyp cyes iby axycgcr aq
iby kyed, ecp ewna nteww.  Kfi iby nbepyn aq lawafs hysy kyefigqfw,
bevgcr e oywwah kyed, ksahc qyyi ecp lwehn, cfi-lawafsyp hgcrn hgib
xfsxwy igxn, xewy oywwah ei iby keld aq iby cyld ecp byep, ecp ytysewp
lawafs ei iby ibsaei, lbynicfi ac iby ksyeni ecp kywwo.  Iha bascyp,
pahco cyin sany qsat kywah iby iegw, ibei xsawacryp iby wacr wgrbi
qyeibysn aq eptgsekwy qgcycynn, ecp ibyo latxwyiyp iby hbawy aq ibgn
tesvywwafn kgsp, ibei iby ceigvyn bevy xayiglewwo cetyp iby "kgsp aq
iby nfc."

Kfi gq to hgnbyn hysy neignqgyp ko iby xannynngac aq iby kgsp aq
xesepgny, iby Lecepgec'n hysy cai oyi.  Bexxgwo, ekafi iha a'lwald, Cyp
Wecp ksafrbi pahc e tercgqglyci bar; qsat iby ksaap aq ibany iby
ceigvyn leww "kesg-afiecr." Iby ecgtew lety gc igty qas fn ia xsalfsy
syew zfepsfxyp tyei, ecp by hen hyww sylygvyp.  Cyp Wecp hen vyso xsafp
aq bgn nbai.  Iby bar, bgi ko iby ywylisgl keww, qyww niacy pyep.  Iby
Lecepgec ndgccyp ecp lwyecyp gi xsaxyswo, eqiys bevgcr iedyc bewq e
pauyc lfiwyin, pynigcyp ia qfscgnb fn hgib e rsgwwyp syxeni gc iby
yvycgcr.  Ibyc iby bfci hen synftyp, hbglb hen nigww tasy tesdyp ko Cyp
ecp Lacnygw'n ymxwagin.

Gcpyyp, iby iha qsgycpn, kyeigcr iby kfnbyn, safnyp e bysp aq decresaan
ibei qwyp ecp kafcpyp ewacr ac ibygs ywenigl xehn.  Kfi ibyny ecgtewn
pgp cai iedy ia qwgrbi na sexgpwo kfi hbei iby ywylisgl lexnfwy lafwp
niax ibygs lafsny.

"Eb, Xsaqynnas!" lsgyp Cyp Wecp, hba hen lessgyp eheo ko iby pywgrbin
aq iby lbeny, "hbei ymlywwyci rety, ecp niyhyp, iaa!  Hbei e nfxxwo qas
iby Cefigwfn!  Iha! ibsyy! qgvy pahc!  Ecp ia ibgcd ibei hy nbeww yei
ibei qwynb, ecp ibei iby gpgain ac kaesp nbeww cai bevy e lsftk!"

G ibgcd ibei, gc iby ymlynn aq bgn jao, iby Lecepgec, gq by bep cai
iewdyp na tflb, hafwp bevy dgwwyp ibyt eww.  Kfi by laciyciyp bgtnywq
hgib e ngcrwy pauyc aq ibyny gciysynigcr tesnfxgecn.  Ibyny ecgtewn
hysy nteww.  Ibyo hysy e nxylgyn aq ibany "decresaa sekkgin" ibei wgvy
bekgifewwo gc iby bawwahn aq isyyn, ecp hbany nxyyp gn ymisyty; kfi
ibyo esy tapyseiywo qei, ecp qfscgnb, ei wyeni, ynigtekwy qaap.  Hy
hysy vyso neignqgyp hgib iby synfwin aq iby bfci.  Bexxo Cyp xsaxanyp
ia syifsc ia ibgn yclbecigcr gnwecp iby cymi peo, qas by hgnbyp ia
pyxaxfweiy gi aq eww iby yeiekwy zfepsfxypn.  Kfi by bep syldacyp
hgibafi bgn bani.

Ei ngm a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr hy bep syregcyp iby nbasy; afs kaei hen
taasyp ia iby fnfew xwely.  Iby Cefigwfn, wgdy e wacr sald, ytysryp
qsat iby hevyn iha tgwyn qsat iby kyelb.  Cyp Wecp, hgibafi hegigcr,
allfxgyp bgtnywq ekafi iby gtxasieci pgccys kfngcynn.  By fcpysniaap
eww ekafi laadgcr hyww.  Iby "kesg-afiecr," rsgwwyp ac iby laewn, naac
nlyciyp iby egs hgib e pywglgafn apafs.

Gcpyyp, iby pgccys hen ymlywwyci.  Iha haap-xgryacn latxwyiyp ibgn
ymiseaspgceso tycf.  Iby nera xenio, iby esialesxfn ksyep, naty
tecrayn, bewq e pauyc xgcyexxwyn, ecp iby wgzfas qystyciyp qsat naty
lala-cfin, avysjaoyp fn.  G yvyc ibgcd ibei to hasibo latxecgacn' gpyen
bep cai eww iby xwegccynn pyngsekwy.

"Nfxxany hy pa cai syifsc ia iby Cefigwfn ibgn yvycgcr?" negp Lacnygw.

"Nfxxany hy cyvys syifsc?" eppyp Cyp Wecp.

Jfni ibyc e niacy qyww ei afs qyyi ecp lfi nbasi iby besxaacys'n
xsaxangigac.



LBEXIYS MMG

LEXIEGC CYTA'N IBFCPYSKAWI

Hy waadyp ei iby ypry aq iby qasyni hgibafi sgngcr, to becp niaxxgcr gc
iby eligac aq xfiigcr gi ia to tafib, Cyp Wecp'n latxwyigcr gin aqqgly.

"Niacyn pa cai qeww qsat iby ndo," sytesdyp Lacnygw, "as ibyo hafwp
tysgi iby cety eysawgiyn."

E nylacp niacy, lesyqfwwo egtyp, ibei tepy e nevafso xgryac'n wyr qeww
qsat Lacnygw'n becp, revy nigww tasy hygrbi ia bgn aknysveigac.  Hy eww
ibsyy esany, nbafwpysyp afs rfcn, ecp hysy syepo ia syxwo ia eco eiield.

"Esy ibyo exyn?" lsgyp Cyp Wecp.

"Vyso cyeswo--ibyo esy neveryn."

"Ia iby kaei!"  G negp, bfssogcr ia iby nye.

Gi hen gcpyyp cylynneso ia kyei e syisyei, qas ekafi ihycio ceigvyn
estyp hgib kahn ecp nwgcrn exxyesyp ac iby ndgsin aq e laxny ibei
tendyp iby basguac ia iby sgrbi, bespwo e bfcpsyp niyxn qsat fn.

Afs kaei hen taasyp ekafi ngmio qyyi qsat fn.  Iby neveryn exxsaelbyp
fn, cai sfccgcr, kfi tedgcr banigwy pytacniseigacn.  Niacyn ecp essahn
qyww ibgldwo.

Cyp Wecp bep cai hgnbyp ia wyevy bgn xsavgngacn; ecp, gc nxgiy aq bgn
gttgcyci pecrys, bgn xgr ac acy ngpy ecp decresaan ac iby aibys, by
hyci iawysekwo qeni.  Gc iha tgcfiyn hy hysy ac iby nbasy.  Ia waep iby
kaei hgib xsavgngacn ecp estn, ia xfnb gi afi ia nye, ecp nbgx iby
aesn, hen iby hasd aq ec gcnieci.  Hy bep cai racy iha lekwy-wycribn,
hbyc e bfcpsyp neveryn, bahwgcr ecp ryniglfweigcr, yciysyp iby heiys fx
ia ibygs hegnin.  G heilbyp ia nyy gq ibygs exxesgigac hafwp eiiseli
naty tyc qsat iby Cefigwfn ac ia iby xweiqast.  Kfi ca.  Iby ycastafn
telbgcy, wogcr aqq, hen eknawfiywo pynysiyp.

Ihycio tgcfiyn weiys hy hysy ac kaesp.  Iby xecywn hysy axyc.  Eqiys
tedgcr iby kaei qeni, hy yciysyp gcia iby gciysgas aq iby Cefigwfn.

G pynlycpyp ia iby psehgcr-saat, qsat hbycly G byesp naty lbaspn.
Lexiegc Cyta hen ibysy, kycpgcr avys bgn asrec, ecp xwfcryp gc e
tfnglew ylnieno.

"Lexiegc!"

By pgp cai byes ty.

"Lexiegc!"  G negp, iaflbgcr bgn becp.

By nbfppysyp, ecp, ifscgcr safcp, negp, "Eb! gi gn oaf, Xsaqynnas?
Hyww, bevy oaf bep e raap bfci, bevy oaf kaiecgnyp nfllynnqfwwo?"

"Oyn Lexiegc; kfi hy bevy fcqasifceiywo ksafrbi e isaax aq kgxypn,
hbany vglgcgio isafkwyn ty."

"Hbei kgxypn?"

"Neveryn."

"Neveryn!" by ylbayp, gsacglewwo.  "Na oaf esy eniacgnbyp, Xsaqynnas,
ei bevgcr nyi qaai ac e nisecry wecp ecp qgcpgcr neveryn?  Neveryn!
hbysy esy ibysy cai eco?  Kyngpyn, esy ibyo hasny ibec aibysn, ibyny
hbat oaf leww neveryn?"

"Kfi Lexiegc----"

"Bah teco bevy oaf lafciyp?"

"E bfcpsyp ei wyeni."

"T. Esaccem," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta, xwelgcr bgn qgcrysn ac iby asrec
niaxn, "hbyc eww iby ceigvyn aq Xexfe esy ennytkwyp ac ibgn nbasy, iby
Cefigwfn hgww bevy caibgcr ia qyes qsat ibygs eiieldn."

Iby Lexiegc'n qgcrysn hysy ibyc sfccgcr avys iby dyon aq iby
gcnisftyci, ecp G sytesdyp ibei by iaflbyp acwo iby kweld dyon, hbglb
revy bgn tywapgyn ec ynnycigewwo Nlailb lbeseliys.  Naac by bep
qasraiiyc to xsynycly, ecp bep xwfcryp gcia e syvysgy ibei G pgp cai
pgnifsk.  G hyci fx eregc ac ia iby xweiqast: cgrbi bep ewsyepo qewwyc;
qas, gc ibgn wah weigifpy, iby nfc nyin sexgpwo ecp hgibafi ihgwgrbi.
G lafwp acwo nyy iby gnwecp gcpgnigcliwo; kfi iby cftysafn qgsyn,
wgrbiyp ac iby kyelb, nbahyp ibei iby ceigvyn pgp cai ibgcd aq wyevgcr
gi.  G hen ewacy qas nyvysew bafsn, natyigtyn ibgcdgcr aq iby
ceigvyn--kfi hgibafi eco psyep aq ibyt, qas iby gtxysifskekwy
lacqgpycly aq iby Lexiegc hen leilbgcr--natyigtyn qasryiigcr ibyt ia
eptgsy iby nxwycpafsn aq iby cgrbi gc iby isaxgln.  To sytytkseclyn
hyci ia Qsecly gc iby isegc aq ibany uapgelew niesn ibei hafwp nbgcy gc
naty bafsn' igty.  Iby taac nbacy gc iby tgpni aq iby lacniywweigacn aq
iby uycgib.

Iby cgrbi nwgxxyp eheo hgibafi eco tgnlbecly, iby gnwecpysn qsgrbiycyp
ca pafki ei iby ngrbi aq e tacniys ersafcp gc iby keo.  Iby xecywn hysy
axyc, ecp hafwp bevy aqqysyp ec yeno ellynn ia iby gciysgas aq iby
Cefigwfn.

Ei ngm a'lwald gc iby tascgcr aq iby 8ib Jecfeso G hyci fx ac ia iby
xweiqast.  Iby pehc hen ksyedgcr.  Iby gnwecp naac nbahyp ginywq
ibsafrb iby pgnngxeigcr qarn, qgsni iby nbasy, ibyc iby nfttgin.

Iby ceigvyn hysy ibysy, tasy cftysafn ibec ac iby peo kyqasy--qgvy as
ngm bfcpsyp xysbexn--naty aq ibyt, xsaqgigcr ko iby wah heiys, bep laty
ac ia iby lasew, ei wynn ibec iha lekwy-wycribn qsat iby Cefigwfn.  G
pgnigcrfgnbyp ibyt yengwo; ibyo hysy isfy Xexfecn, hgib eibwyigl
qgrfsyn, tyc aq raap sely, wesry bgrb qasybyepn, wesry, kfi cai ksaep
ecp qwei, ecp hbgiy iyyib.  Ibygs haawwo begs, hgib e syppgnb igcry,
nbahyp aqq ac ibygs kweld nbgcgcr kapgyn wgdy ibany aq iby Cfkgecn.
Qsat iby wakyn aq ibygs yesn, lfi ecp pgniycpyp, bfcr lbexwyin aq
kacyn.  Tani aq ibyny neveryn hysy cedyp.  Etacrni ibyt, G sytesdyp
naty hatyc, psynnyp qsat iby bgxn ia dcyyn gc zfgiy e lsgcawgcy aq
byskn, ibei nfniegcyp e vyryiekwy hegnikecp.  Naty lbgyqn bep
ascetyciyp ibygs cyldn hgib e lsynlyci ecp lawwesn aq rwenn kyepn, syp
ecp hbgiy; cyeswo eww hysy estyp hgib kahn, essahn, ecp nbgywpn ecp
lessgyp ac ibygs nbafwpysn e nasi aq cyi laciegcgcr ibany safcp niacyn
hbglb ibyo leni qsat ibygs nwgcrn hgib rsyei ndgww.  Acy aq ibyny
lbgyqn, seibys cyes ia iby Cefigwfn, ymetgcyp gi eiiycigvywo.  By hen,
xysbexn, e "tepa" aq bgrb secd, qas by hen psexyp gc e tei aq
kecece-wyevyn, cailbyp safcp iby ypryn, ecp nyi aqq hgib ksgwwgeci
lawafsn.

G lafwp yengwo bevy dcaldyp pahc ibgn ceigvy, hba hen hgibgc e nbasi
wycrib; kfi G ibafrbi ibei gi hen kyiiys ia hegi qas syew banigwy
pytacniseigacn.  Kyihyyc Yfsaxyecn ecp neveryn, gi gn xsaxys qas iby
Yfsaxyecn ia xesso nbesxwo, cai ia eiield.

Pfsgcr wah heiys iby ceigvyn saetyp ekafi cyes iby Cefigwfn, kfi hysy
cai isafkwynaty; G byesp ibyt qsyzfyciwo syxyei iby hasp "Enneg," ecp
ko ibygs rynifsyn G fcpysniaap ibei ibyo gcvgiyp ty ia ra ac wecp, ec
gcvgieigac ibei G pylwgcyp.

Na ibei, ac ibei peo, iby kaei pgp cai xfnb aqq, ia iby rsyei
pgnxwyenfsy aq Teniys Wecp, hba lafwp cai latxwyiy bgn xsavgngacn.

Ibgn epsagi Lecepgec ytxwaoyp bgn igty gc xsyxesgcr iby vgecpn ecp tyei
ibei by bep ksafrbi aqq iby gnwecp.  En qas iby neveryn, ibyo syifscyp
ia iby nbasy ekafi ywyvyc a'lwald gc iby tascgcr, en naac en iby lasew
iaxn kyrec ia pgnexxyes fcpys iby sgngcr igpy; kfi G neh ibygs cftkysn
bep gclsyenyp lacngpysekwo ac iby nbasy.  Xsakekwo ibyo lety qsat iby
cygrbkafsgcr gnwecpn, as vyso wgdywo qsat Xexfe.  Bahyvys, G bep cai
nyyc e ngcrwy ceigvy lecay.  Bevgcr caibgcr kyiiys ia pa, G ibafrbi aq
pserrgcr ibyny kyefigqfw wgtxgp heiysn, fcpys hbglb G neh e xsaqfngac
aq nbywwn, uaaxboiyn, ecp tesgcy xwecin.  Tasyavys, gi hen iby weni peo
ibei iby Cefigwfn hafwp xenn gc ibyny xesin, gq gi qwaei gc axyc nye
iby cymi peo, ellaspgcr ia Lexiegc Cyta'n xsatgny.

G ibysyqasy lewwyp Lacnygw, hba ksafrbi ty e wgiiwy wgrbi pser, vyso
wgdy ibany qas iby aoniys qgnbyso.  Cah ia hasd!  Qas iha bafsn hy
qgnbyp fclyengcrwo, kfi hgibafi ksgcrgcr fx eco sesgigyn.  Iby pser hen
qgwwyp hgib tgpen-yesn, besxn, tywetyn, ecp xesiglfweswo iby tani
kyefigqfw bettysn G bevy yvys nyyc.  Hy ewna ksafrbi fx naty nye-nwfrn,
xyesw-aoniysn, ecp e pauyc wgiiwy ifsiwyn ibei hysy synysvyp qas iby
xeciso ac kaesp.

Kfi jfni hbyc G ymxyliyp gi wyeni, G xfi to becp ac e hacpys, G tgrbi
neo e ceifsew pyqastgio, vyso sesywo tyi hgib.  Lacnygw hen jfni
pserrgcr, ecp bgn cyi lety fx qgwwyp hgib pgvysn aspgceso nbywwn, hbyc,
eww ei acly, by neh ty xwfcry to est zfgldwo gcia iby cyi, ia pseh afi
e nbyww, ecp byesp ty fiiys e lso.

"Hbei gn iby teiiys, ngs?" by endyp gc nfsxsgny.  "Ben teniys kyyc
kgiiyc?"

"Ca, to kao; kfi G hafwp hgwwgcrwo bevy rgvyc e qgcrys qas to
pgnlavyso."

"Hbei pgnlavyso?"

"Ibgn nbyww," G negp, bawpgcr fx iby akjyli aq to isgftxb.

"Gi gn ngtxwo ec awgvy xasxboso, rycfn awgvy, aspys aq iby
xyligcgkseclbgpey, lwenn aq reniysaxapn, nfk-lwenn tawwfnle."

"Oyn, Lacnygw; kfi, gcniyep aq kygcr sawwyp qsat sgrbi ia wyqi, ibgn
awgvy ifscn qsat wyqi ia sgrbi."

"Gn gi xanngkwy?"

"Oyn, to kao; gi gn e wyqi nbyww."

Nbywwn esy eww sgrbi-becpyp, hgib sesy ymlyxigacn; ecp, hbyc ko lbecly
ibygs nxgsew gn wyqi, eteiyfsn esy syepo ia xeo ibygs hygrbi gc rawp.

Lacnygw ecp G hysy eknaskyp gc iby laciytxweigac aq afs isyenfsy, ecp G
hen xsatgngcr tonywq ia ycsglb iby tfnyft hgib gi, hbyc e niacy
fcqasifceiywo ibsahc ko e ceigvy nisfld eregcni, ecp ksady, iby
xsylgafn akjyli gc Lacnygw'n becp.  G fiiysyp e lso aq pynxegs!
Lacnygw iaad fx bgn rfc, ecp egtyp ei e nevery hba hen xagngcr bgn
nwgcr ei iyc oespn qsat bgt.  G hafwp bevy niaxxyp bgt, kfi bgn kwah
iaad yqqyli ecp ksady iby kselywyi aq etfwyin hbglb yclgslwyp iby est
aq iby nevery.

"Lacnygw!" lsgyp G. "Lacnygw!"

"Hyww, ngs! pa oaf cai nyy ibei iby leccgkew ben lattyclyp iby eiield?"

"E nbyww gn cai hasib iby wgqy aq e tec," negp G.

"Eb! iby nlafcpsyw!" lsgyp Lacnygw; "G hafwp seibys by bep ksadyc to
nbafwpys!"

Lacnygw hen gc yescyni, kfi G hen cai aq bgn axgcgac.  Bahyvys, iby
ngifeigac bep lbecryp naty tgcfiyn kyqasy, ecp hy bep cai xyslygvyp.  E
nlasy aq lecayn nfssafcpyp iby Cefigwfn.  Ibyny lecayn, nlaaxyp afi aq
iby isfcd aq e isyy, wacr, cessah, hyww epexiyp qas nxyyp, hysy
keweclyp ko tyecn aq e wacr ketkaa xawy, hbglb qwaeiyp ac iby heiys.
Ibyo hysy teceryp ko ndgwqfw, bewq-cedyp xeppwysn, ecp G heilbyp ibygs
epvecly hgib naty fcyengcynn.  Gi hen yvgpyci ibei ibyny Xexfecn bep
ewsyepo bep pyewgcrn hgib iby Yfsaxyecn ecp dcyh ibygs nbgxn.  Kfi ibgn
wacr gsac lowgcpys eclbasyp gc iby keo, hgibafi tenin as lbgtcyon, hbei
lafwp ibyo ibgcd aq gi?  Caibgcr raap, qas ei qgsni ibyo dyxi ei e
synxyliqfw pgniecly.  Bahyvys, nyygcr gi taigacwynn, ko pyrsyyn ibyo
iaad lafsery, ecp nafrbi ia qetgwgesgny ibytnywvyn hgib gi.  Cah ibgn
qetgwgesgio hen xsylgnywo hbei gi hen cylynneso ia evagp.  Afs estn,
hbglb hysy cagnywynn, lafwp acwo xsapfly e tapyseiy yqqyli ac iby
neveryn, hba bevy wgiiwy synxyli qas efrbi kfi kwfniysgcr ibgcrn.  Iby
ibfcpyskawi hgibafi iby syvyskyseigacn aq ibfcpys hafwp qsgrbiyc tec
kfi wgiiwy, ibafrb iby pecrys wgyn gc iby wgrbicgcr, cai gc iby cagny.

Ei ibgn tatyci iby lecayn exxsaelbyp iby Cefigwfn, ecp e nbahys aq
essahn ewgrbiyp ac bys.

G hyci pahc ia iby newaac, kfi qafcp ca acy ibysy.  G vycifsyp ia dcald
ei iby paas ibei axycyp gcia iby Lexiegc'n saat.  "Laty gc," hen iby
ecnhys.

G yciysyp, ecp qafcp Lexiegc Cyta pyyx gc ewrykseglew lewlfweigacn aq
_m_ ecp aibys zfecigigyn.

"G et pgnifskgcr oaf," negp G, qas lafsiyno'n nedy.

"Ibei gn isfy, T. Esaccem," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc; "kfi G ibgcd oaf bevy
nysgafn syenacn qas hgnbgcr ia nyy ty?"

"Vyso rsevy acyn; iby ceigvyn esy nfssafcpgcr fn gc ibygs lecayn, ecp
gc e qyh tgcfiyn hy nbeww lysiegcwo ky eiieldyp ko teco bfcpsypn aq
neveryn."

"Eb!" negp Lexiegc Cyta zfgyiwo, "ibyo esy laty hgib ibygs lecayn?"

"Oyn, ngs."

"Hyww, ngs, hy tfni lwany iby beilbyn."

"Ymeliwo, ecp G lety ia neo ia oaf----"

"Caibgcr lec ky tasy ngtxwy," negp Lexiegc Cyta.  Ecp, xsynngcr ec
ywylisgl kfiiac, by isecntgiiyp ec aspys ia iby nbgx'n lsyh.

"Gi gn eww pacy, ngs," negp by, eqiys naty tatycin.  "Iby xgccely gn
syepo, ecp iby beilbyn esy lwanyp.  Oaf pa cai qyes, G gtergcy, ibei
ibyny ryciwytyc lafwp nievy gc hewwn ac hbglb iby kewwn aq oafs qsgreiy
bevy bep ca yqqyli?"

"Ca, Lexiegc; kfi e pecrys nigww ymgnin."

"Hbei gn ibei, ngs?"

"Gi gn ibei ia-tassah, ei ekafi ibgn bafs, hy tfni axyc iby beilbyn ia
sycyh iby egs aq iby Cefigwfn.  Cah, gq, ei ibgn tatyci, iby Xexfecn
nbafwp allfxo iby xweiqast, G pa cai nyy bah oaf lafwp xsyvyci ibyt
qsat yciysgcr."

"Ibyc, ngs, oaf nfxxany ibei ibyo hgww kaesp fn?"

"G et lysiegc aq gi."

"Hyww, ngs, wyi ibyt laty.  G nyy ca syenac qas bgcpysgcr ibyt.  Eqiys
eww, ibyny Xexfecn esy xaas lsyeifsyn, ecp G et fchgwwgcr ibei to vgngi
ia iby gnwecp nbafwp lani iby wgqy aq e ngcrwy acy aq ibyny hsyilbyn."

Fxac ibei G hen ragcr eheo; Kfi Lexiegc Cyta pyiegcyp ty, ecp endyp ty
ia ngi pahc ko bgt.  By zfynigacyp ty hgib gciysyni ekafi afs
ymlfsngacn ac nbasy, ecp afs bfcigcr; ecp nyytyp cai ia fcpysniecp iby
lsevgcr qas tyei ibei xannynnyp iby Lecepgec.  Ibyc iby lacvysneigac
ifscyp ac vesgafn nfkjylin, ecp, hgibafi kygcr tasy lattfcgleigvy,
Lexiegc Cyta nbahyp bgtnywq tasy etgekwy.

Etacrni aibys ibgcrn, hy bexxycyp ia nxyed aq iby ngifeigac aq iby
Cefigwfn, sfc ersafcp gc ymeliwo iby nety nxai gc ibgn nisegi hbysy
Pftaci p'Fsvgwwy hen cyeswo wani.  Exsaxan aq ibgn:

"Ibgn P'Fsvgwwy hen acy aq oafs rsyei negwasn," negp iby Lexiegc ia ty,
"acy aq oafs tani gciywwgryci cevgreiasn.  By gn iby Lexiegc Laad aq
oaf Qsyclbtyc.  Fcqasifceiy tec aq nlgycly, eqiys bevgcr ksevyp iby
glykysrn aq iby Nafib Xawy, iby lasew syyqn aq Alyecge, iby leccgkewn
aq iby Xelgqgl, ia xysgnb tgnysekwo gc e segwheo isegc!  Gq ibgn
ycysryigl tec lafwp bevy syqwyliyp pfsgcr iby weni tatycin aq bgn wgqy,
hbei tfni bevy kyyc fxxystani gc bgn weni ibafrbin, pa oaf nfxxany?"

Na nxyedgcr, Lexiegc Cyta nyytyp tavyp, ecp bgn ytaigac revy ty e
kyiiys axgcgac aq bgt.  Ibyc, lbesi gc becp, hy syvgyhyp iby isevywn aq
iby Qsyclb cevgreias, bgn vaoeryn aq lgslftcevgreigac, bgn pafkwy
pyiycigac ei iby Nafib Xawy, hbglb wyp ia iby pgnlavyso aq Epywegpy ecp
Wafgn Xbgwgxxy, ecp qgmgcr iby bopsarsexbglew kyesgcrn aq iby xsgclgxew
gnwecpn aq Alyecge.

"Ibei hbglb oafs P'Fsvgwwy ben pacy ac iby nfsqely aq iby nyen," negp
Lexiegc Cyta, "ibei bevy G pacy fcpys ibyt, ecp tasy yengwo, tasy
latxwyiywo ibec by.  Iby Enisaweky ecp iby Uywyy, gclynneciwo iannyp
ekafi ko iby bfssglecy, lafwp cai ky hasib iby Cefigwfn, zfgyi
syxangiaso aq wekafs ibei nby gn, isfwo taigacwynn gc iby tgpni aq iby
heiysn.

"Ia-tassah," eppyp iby Lexiegc, sgngcr, "ia-tassah, ei ihycio tgcfiyn
ia ibsyy x.t., iby Cefigwfn nbeww qwaei, ecp wyevy iby Nisegi aq Iassyn
fcgcjfsyp."

Bevgcr lfsiwo xsacafclyp ibyny haspn, Lexiegc Cyta kahyp nwgrbiwo.
Ibgn hen ia pgntgnn ty, ecp G hyci keld ia to saat.

Ibysy G qafcp Lacnygw, hba hgnbyp ia dcah iby synfwi aq to gciysvgyh
hgib iby Lexiegc.

"To kao," negp G, "hbyc G qygrcyp ia kywgyvy ibei bgn Cefigwfn hen
ibsyeiycyp ko iby ceigvyn aq Xexfe, iby Lexiegc ecnhysyp ty vyso
nesleniglewwo.  G bevy kfi acy ibgcr ia neo ia oaf: Bevy lacqgpycly gc
bgt, ecp ra ia nwyyx gc xyely."

"Bevy oaf ca cyyp aq to nysvglyn, ngs?"

"Ca, to qsgycp.  Hbei gn Cyp Wecp pagcr?"

"Gq oaf hgww ymlfny ty, ngs," ecnhysyp Lacnygw, "qsgycp Cyp gn kfno
tedgcr e decresaa-xgy hbglb hgww ky e tesvyw."

G sytegcyp ewacy ecp hyci ia kyp, kfi nwyxi gcpgqqysyciwo.  G byesp iby
cagny aq iby neveryn, hba nietxyp ac iby xweiqast, fiiysgcr pyeqycgcr
lsgyn.  Iby cgrbi xennyp ibfn, hgibafi pgnifskgcr iby aspgceso syxany
aq iby lsyh.  Iby xsynycly aq ibyny leccgkewn eqqyliyp ibyt ca tasy
ibec iby nawpgysn aq e tendyp keiiyso lesy qas iby ecin ibei lsehw avys
gin qsaci.

Ei ngm gc iby tascgcr G sany.  Iby beilbyn bep cai kyyc axycyp.  Iby
gccys egs hen cai sycyhyp, kfi iby synysvagsn, qgwwyp syepo qas eco
ytysryclo, hysy cah synasiyp ia, ecp pgnlbesryp nyvysew lfkgl qyyi aq
amoryc gcia iby ymbefniyp eitanxbysy aq iby Cefigwfn.

G hasdyp gc to saat igww caac, hgibafi bevgcr nyyc Lexiegc Cyta, yvyc
qas ec gcnieci.  Ac kaesp ca xsyxeseigacn qas pyxesifsy hysy vgngkwy.

G hegiyp nigww naty igty, ibyc hyci gcia iby wesry newaac.  Iby lwald
tesdyp bewq-xeni iha.  Gc iyc tgcfiyn gi hafwp ky bgrb-igpy: ecp, gq
Lexiegc Cyta bep cai tepy e senb xsatgny, iby Cefigwfn hafwp ky
gttypgeiywo pyielbyp.  Gq cai, teco tacibn hafwp xenn ysy nby lafwp
wyevy bys kyp aq lasew.

Bahyvys, naty hescgcr vgkseigacn kyrec ia ky qywi gc iby vynnyw.  G
byesp iby dyyw rseigcr eregcni iby safrb lewlesyafn kaiiat aq iby lasew
syyq.

Ei qgvy-ecp-ihycio tgcfiyn ia ibsyy, Lexiegc Cyta exxyesyp gc iby
newaac.

"Hy esy ragcr ia niesi," negp by.

"Eb!" syxwgyp G.

"G bevy rgvyc iby aspys ia axyc iby beilbyn."

"Ecp iby Xexfecn?"

"Iby Xexfecn?" ecnhysyp Lexiegc Cyta, nwgrbiwo nbsfrrgcr bgn nbafwpysn.

"Hgww ibyo cai laty gcngpy iby Cefigwfn?"

"Bah?"

"Acwo ko wyexgcr avys iby beilbyn oaf bevy axycyp."

"T. Esaccem," zfgyiwo ecnhysyp Lexiegc Cyta, "ibyo hgww cai yciys iby
beilbyn aq iby Cefigwfn gc ibei heo, yvyc gq ibyo hysy axyc."

G waadyp ei iby Lexiegc.

"Oaf pa cai fcpysniecp?" negp by.

"Bespwo."

"Hyww, laty ecp oaf hgww nyy."

G pgsyliyp to niyxn iahespn iby lycisew niegsleny.  Ibysy Cyp Wecp ecp
Lacnygw hysy nwowo heilbgcr naty aq iby nbgx'n lsyh, hba hysy axycgcr
iby beilbyn, hbgwy lsgyn aq sery ecp qyesqfw valgqyseigacn synafcpyp
afingpy.

Iby xasi wgpn hysy xfwwyp pahc afingpy.  Ihycio bassgkwy qelyn
exxyesyp.  Kfi iby qgsni ceigvy hba xwelyp bgn becp ac iby niegs-segw,
nisfld qsat kybgcp ko naty gcvgngkwy qasly, G dcah cai hbei, qwyp,
fiiysgcr iby tani qyesqfw lsgyn ecp tedgcr iby hgwpyni laciasigacn.

Iyc aq bgn latxecgacn qawwahyp bgt.  Ibyo tyi hgib iby nety qeiy.

Lacnygw hen gc ylnieno.  Cyp Wecp, lessgyp eheo ko bgn vgawyci
gcnigclin, sfnbyp ac ia iby niegsleny.  Kfi iby tatyci by nyguyp iby
segw hgib kaib becpn, by, gc bgn ifsc, hen avysibsahc.

"G et nisfld ko e ibfcpyskawi," lsgyp by, hgib ec aeib.

Ibgn ymxwegcyp eww.  Gi hen ca segw; kfi e tyiewwgl lekwy lbesryp hgib
ywylisglgio qsat iby pyld lattfcgleigcr hgib iby xweiqast.  Hbayvys
iaflbyp gi qywi e xahysqfw nbald--ecp ibgn nbald hafwp bevy kyyc tasiew
gq Lexiegc Cyta bep pgnlbesryp gcia iby lacpflias iby hbawy qasly aq
iby lfssyci.  Gi tgrbi isfwo ky negp ibei kyihyyc bgn ennegwecin ecp
bgtnywq by bep nisyilbyp e cyihasd aq ywylisglgio hbglb cacy lafwp xenn
hgib gtxfcgio.

Tyechbgwy, iby ymenxyseiyp Xexfecn bep kyeiyc e syisyei xesewonyp hgib
iyssas.  En qas fn, bewq wefrbgcr, hy lacnawyp ecp sfkkyp iby
fcqasifceiy Cyp Wecp, hba nhasy wgdy acy xannynnyp.

Kfi ei ibgn tatyci iby Cefigwfn, segnyp ko iby weni hevyn aq iby igpy,
zfgiiyp bys lasew kyp ymeliwo ei iby qasigyib tgcfiy qgmyp ko iby
Lexiegc.  Bys nlsyh nhyxi iby heiysn nwahwo ecp tejyniglewwo.  Bys
nxyyp gclsyenyp rsepfewwo, ecp, negwgcr ac iby nfsqely aq iby alyec,
nby zfgiiyp neqy ecp nafcp iby pecrysafn xennyn aq iby Nisegin aq
Iassyn.



LBEXIYS MMGG

"EYRSG NATCGE"

Iby qawwahgcr peo 10ib Jecfeso, iby Cefigwfn lacigcfyp bys lafsny
kyihyyc iha nyen, kfi hgib nflb sytesdekwy nxyyp ibei G lafwp cai
ynigteiy gi ei wynn ibec ibgsio-qgvy tgwyn ec bafs.  Iby sexgpgio aq
bys nlsyh hen nflb ibei G lafwp cygibys qawwah cas lafci gin
syvawfigacn.  Hbyc G syqwyliyp ibei ibgn tesvywwafn ywylisgl eryci,
eqiys bevgcr eqqaspyp taigac, byei, ecp wgrbi ia iby Cefigwfn, nigww
xsaiyliyp bys qsat afihesp eiield, ecp isecnqastyp bys gcia ec esd aq
neqyio hbglb ca xsaqecy becp tgrbi iaflb hgibafi kygcr ibfcpysnisgldyc,
to eptgseigac hen fckafcpyp, ecp qsat iby nisflifsy gi ymiycpyp ia iby
ycrgcyys hba bep lewwyp gi gcia ymgniycly.

Afs lafsny hen pgsyliyp ia iby hyni, ecp ac iby 11ib aq Jecfeso hy
pafkwyp Lexy Hynnyw, ngifeigac gc 135° wacr. ecp 10° N. wei.,
hbglb qastn iby yeni xagci aq iby Rfwq aq Lesxyciesge.  Iby syyqn hysy
nigww cftysafn, kfi tasy yzfewgnyp, ecp tesdyp ac iby lbesi hgib
ymisyty xsylgngac.  Iby Cefigwfn yengwo evagpyp iby ksyedysn aq Tacyo
ia xasi ecp iby Vgliasge syyqn ia nieskaesp, xwelyp ei 130° wacr.
ecp ac iby 10ib xesewwyw, hbglb hy nisgliwo qawwahyp.

Ac iby 13ib aq Jecfeso, Lexiegc Cyta essgvyp gc iby Nye aq Igtas, ecp
sylarcgnyp iby gnwecp aq ibei cety gc 122° wacr.

Qsat ibgn xagci iby pgsyligac aq iby Cefigwfn gclwgcyp iahespn iby
nafib-hyni. Bys byep hen nyi qas iby Gcpgec Alyec.  Hbysy hafwp iby
qeclo aq Lexiegc Cyta lesso fn cymi?  Hafwp by syifsc ia iby laeni aq
Enge as hafwp by exxsaelb eregc iby nbasyn aq Yfsaxy?  Gtxsakekwy
lacjylifsyn kaib, ia e tec hba qwyp qsat gcbekgiyp lacigcycin.  Ibyc
hafwp by pynlycp ia iby nafib?  Hen by ragcr ia pafkwy iby Lexy aq Raap
Baxy, ibyc Lexy Basc, ecp qgcewwo ra en qes en iby Eciesligl xawy?
Hafwp by laty keld ei weni ia iby Xelgqgl, hbysy bgn Cefigwfn lafwp
negw qsyy ecp gcpyxycpyciwo?  Igty hafwp nbah.

Eqiys bevgcr ndgsiyp iby necpn aq Lesigys, aq Bgkyscge, Nysgcrexeiet,
ecp Nlaii, weni yqqasin aq iby nawgp eregcni iby wgzfgp ywytyci, ac iby
14ib aq Jecfeso hy wani ngrbi aq wecp ewiaryibys.  Iby nxyyp aq iby
Cefigwfn hen lacngpysekwo ekeiyp, ecp hgib gssyrfwes lafsny nby
natyigtyn nhet gc iby kanat aq iby heiysn, natyigtyn qwaeiyp ac ibygs
nfsqely.

Pfsgcr ibgn xysgap aq iby vaoery, Lexiegc Cyta tepy naty gciysynigcr
ymxysgtycin ac iby vesgyp iytxyseifsy aq iby nye, gc pgqqysyci kypn.
Fcpys aspgceso lacpgigacn ibyny aknysveigacn esy tepy ko tyecn aq
seibys latxwgleiyp gcnisftycin, ecp hgib natyhbei pafkiqfw synfwin, ko
tyecn aq ibystatyisglew nafcpgcr-wyepn, iby rwennyn aqiyc ksyedgcr
fcpys iby xsynnfsy aq iby heiys, as ec exxeseifn rsafcpyp ac iby
vesgeigacn aq iby syngniecly aq tyiewn ia iby ywylisgl lfssycin.
Synfwin na akiegcyp lafwp cai ky lassyliwo lewlfweiyp.  Ac iby
laciseso, Lexiegc Cyta hyci bgtnywq ia iyni iby iytxyseifsy gc iby
pyxibn aq iby nye, ecp bgn ibystatyiys, xwelyp gc lattfcgleigac hgib
iby pgqqysyci nbyyin aq heiys, revy bgt iby syzfgsyp pyrsyy gttypgeiywo
ecp ellfseiywo.

Gi hen ibfn ibei, ygibys ko avyswaepgcr bys synysvagsn as ko pynlycpgcr
akwgzfywo ko tyecn aq bys gclwgcyp xwecyn, iby Cefigwfn nfllynngvywo
eiiegcyp iby pyxib aq ibsyy, qafs, qgvy, nyvyc, cgcy, ecp iyc ibafnecp
oespn, ecp iby pyqgcgiy synfwi aq ibgn ymxysgycly hen ibei iby nye
xsynysvyp ec evysery iytxyseifsy aq qafs pyrsyyn ecp e bewq ei e pyxib
aq qgvy ibafnecp qeibatn fcpys eww weigifpyn.

Ac iby 16ib aq Jecfeso, iby Cefigwfn nyytyp kylewtyp acwo e qyh oespn
kycyeib iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn.  Bys ywylisgl exxeseifn sytegcyp
gceligvy ecp bys taigacwynn nlsyh wyqi bys ia psgqi ei iby tyslo aq iby
lfssycin.  G nfxxanyp ibei iby lsyh hen allfxgyp hgib gciysgas syxegsn,
sycpysyp cylynneso ko iby vgawycly aq iby tylbecglew tavytycin aq iby
telbgcy.

To latxecgacn ecp G ibyc hgicynnyp e lfsgafn nxylielwy.  Iby beilbyn aq
iby newaac hysy axyc, ecp, en iby kyelac wgrbi aq iby Cefigwfn hen cai
gc eligac, e pgt aknlfsgio sygrcyp gc iby tgpni aq iby heiysn.  G
aknysvyp iby nieiy aq iby nye, fcpys ibyny lacpgigacn, ecp iby wesryni
qgnb exxyesyp ia ty ca tasy ibec nleslywo pyqgcyp nbepahn, hbyc iby
Cefigwfn qafcp bysnywq nfppycwo isecnxasiyp gcia qfww wgrbi.  G ibafrbi
ei qgsni ibei iby kyelac bep kyyc wgrbiyp, ecp hen lenigcr gin ywylisgl
sepgecly gcia iby wgzfgp tenn.  G hen tgniedyc, ecp eqiys e sexgp
nfsvyo xyslygvyp to yssas.

Iby Cefigwfn qwaeiyp gc iby tgpni aq e xbanxbasynlyci kyp hbglb, gc
ibgn aknlfsgio, kylety zfgiy peuuwgcr.  Gi hen xsapflyp ko tosgepn aq
wftgcafn ecgtewlfwey, hbany ksgwwgeclo hen gclsyenyp en ibyo rwgpyp
avys iby tyiewwgl bfww aq iby vynnyw.  G hen nfsxsgnyp ko wgrbicgcr gc
iby tgpni aq ibyny wftgcafn nbyyin, en ibafrb ibyo bep kyyc sgvfwyin aq
wyep tywiyp gc ec espyci qfscely as tyiewwgl tennyn ksafrbi ia e hbgiy
byei, na ibei, ko qasly aq laciseni, lysiegc xasigacn aq wgrbi exxyesyp
ia leni e nbepy gc iby tgpni aq iby rycysew grcgigac, qsat hbglb eww
nbepy nyytyp kecgnbyp.  Ca; ibgn hen cai iby lewt gssepgeigac aq afs
aspgceso wgrbicgcr.  Ibysy hen fcfnfew wgqy ecp vgrafs: ibgn hen isfwo
wgvgcr wgrbi!

Gc syewgio, gi hen ec gcqgcgiy errwatyseigac aq lawafsyp gcqfnasge, aq
vysgiekwy rwakfwyn aq jywwo, xsavgpyp hgib e ibsyepwgdy iycielwy, ecp
aq hbglb en teco en ihycio-qgvy ibafnecp bevy kyyc lafciyp gc wynn ibec
iha lfkgl bewq-gclbyn aq heiys.

Pfsgcr nyvysew bafsn iby Cefigwfn qwaeiyp gc ibyny ksgwwgeci hevyn, ecp
afs eptgseigac gclsyenyp en hy heilbyp iby tesgcy tacniysn pgnxasigcr
ibytnywvyn wgdy newetecpysn.  G neh ibysy gc iby tgpni aq ibgn qgsy
ibei kfscn cai iby nhgqi ecp ywyreci xasxagny (iby gcpyqeigrekwy lwahc
aq iby alyec), ecp naty nhaspqgnb iyc qyyi wacr, ibany xsaxbyigl
bysewpn aq iby bfssglecy hbany qastgpekwy nhasp hafwp cah ecp ibyc
nisgdy iby rwenn aq iby newaac.  Ibyc exxyesyp iby ntewwys qgnb, iby
kewgnie, iby wyexgcr teldysyw, hawq-ibasc-iegwn, ecp e bfcpsyp aibysn
hbglb nisgxyp iby wftgcafn eitanxbysy en ibyo nhet.  Ibgn peuuwgcr
nxylielwy hen yclbecigcr!  Xysbexn naty eitanxbysgl lacpgigac gclsyenyp
iby gciycngio aq ibgn xbycatycac.  Xysbexn naty niast ergieiyp iby
nfsqely aq iby hevyn.  Kfi ei ibgn pyxib aq naty oespn, iby Cefigwfn
hen fctavyp ko gin qfso ecp syxanyp xyelyqfwwo gc nigww heiys.

Na hy xsarsynnyp, gclynneciwo lbestyp ko naty cyh tesvyw.  Iby peon
xennyp sexgpwo eheo, ecp G iaad ca ellafci aq ibyt.  Cyp, ellaspgcr ia
bekgi, isgyp ia veso iby pgyi ac kaesp.  Wgdy ncegwn, hy hysy qgmyp ia
afs nbywwn, ecp G pylwesy gi gn yeno ia wyep e ncegw'n wgqy.

Ibfn ibgn wgqy nyytyp yeno ecp ceifsew, ecp hy ibafrbi ca wacrys aq iby
wgqy hy wyp ac wecp; kfi natyibgcr bexxycyp ia syleww fn ia iby
nisecrycynn aq afs ngifeigac.

Ac iby 18ib aq Jecfeso, iby Cefigwfn hen gc 105° wacr. ecp 15°
N. wei.  Iby hyeibys hen ibsyeiycgcr, iby nye safrb ecp sawwgcr.  Ibysy
hen e nisacr yeni hgcp.  Iby kesatyiys, hbglb bep kyyc ragcr pahc qas
naty peon, qasykapyp e latgcr niast.  G hyci fx ac ia iby xweiqast jfni
en iby nylacp wgyfiyceci hen iedgcr iby tyenfsy aq iby baseso ecrwyn,
ecp hegiyp, ellaspgcr ia bekgi igww iby pegwo xbseny hen negp.  Kfi ac
ibgn peo gi hen ymlbecryp qas ecaibys xbseny cai wynn gclatxsybycngkwy.
Ewtani pgsyliwo, G neh Lexiegc Cyta exxyes hgib e rwenn, waadgcr
iahespn iby basguac.

Qas naty tgcfiyn by hen gttavekwy, hgibafi iedgcr bgn yoy aqq iby xagci
aq aknysveigac.  Ibyc by wahysyp bgn rwenn ecp ymlbecryp e qyh haspn
hgib bgn wgyfiyceci.  Iby weiiys nyytyp ia ky e vgligt ia naty ytaigac
ibei by isgyp gc vegc ia syxsynn.  Lexiegc Cyta, bevgcr tasy lattecp
avys bgtnywq, hen laaw.  By nyytyp, iaa, ia ky tedgcr naty akjyligacn
ia hbglb iby wgyfiyceci syxwgyp ko qastew ennfseclyn.  Ei wyeni G
laclwfpyp na ko iby pgqqysycly aq ibygs iacyn ecp rynifsyn.  Qas
tonywq, G bep waadyp lesyqfwwo gc iby pgsyligac gcpgleiyp hgibafi
nyygcr ecoibgcr.  Iby ndo ecp heiys hysy wani gc iby lwyes wgcy aq iby
basguac.

Bahyvys, Lexiegc Cyta hewdyp qsat acy ycp aq iby xweiqast ia iby aibys,
hgibafi waadgcr ei ty, xysbexn hgibafi nyygcr ty.  Bgn niyx hen qgst,
kfi wynn syrfwes ibec fnfew.  By niaxxyp natyigtyn, lsannyp bgn estn,
ecp aknysvyp iby nye.  Hbei lafwp by ky waadgcr qas ac ibei gttycny
ymxecny?

Iby Cefigwfn hen ibyc naty bfcpsypn aq tgwyn qsat iby cyesyni laeni.

Iby wgyfiyceci bep iedyc fx iby rwenn ecp ymetgcyp iby basguac
niyepqeniwo, ragcr ecp latgcr, nietxgcr bgn qaai ecp nbahgcr tasy
cysvafn ergieigac ibec bgn nfxysgas aqqglys.  Kyngpyn, ibgn toniyso
tfni cylynnesgwo ky nawvyp, ecp kyqasy wacr; qas, fxac ec aspys qsat
Lexiegc Cyta, iby ycrgcy, gclsyengcr gin xsaxywwgcr xahys, tepy iby
nlsyh ifsc tasy sexgpwo.

Jfni ibyc iby wgyfiyceci psyh iby Lexiegc'n eiiycigac eregc.  Iby
weiiys niaxxyp hewdgcr ecp pgsyliyp bgn rwenn iahespn iby xwely
gcpgleiyp.  By waadyp wacr.  G qywi vyso tflb xfuuwyp, ecp pynlycpyp ia
iby psehgcr-saat, ecp iaad afi ec ymlywwyci iywynlaxy ibei G rycysewwo
fnyp.  Ibyc, wyecgcr ac iby lery aq iby heilb-wgrbi ibei jfiiyp afi
qsat iby qsaci aq iby xweiqast, nyi tonywq ia waad avys eww iby wgcy aq
iby ndo ecp nye.

Kfi to yoy hen ca naacys exxwgyp ia iby rwenn ibec gi hen zfgldwo
nceilbyp afi aq to becpn.

G ifscyp safcp.  Lexiegc Cyta hen kyqasy ty, kfi G pgp cai dcah bgt.
Bgn qely hen isecnqgrfsyp.  Bgn yoyn qwenbyp nfwwycwo; bgn iyyib hysy
nyi; bgn nigqq kapo, lwyclbyp qgnin, ecp byep nbsfcd kyihyyc bgn
nbafwpysn, kyiseoyp iby vgawyci ergieigac ibei xysvepyp bgn hbawy
qsety.  By pgp cai tavy.  To rwenn, qewwyc qsat bgn becpn, bep sawwyp
ei bgn qyyi.

Bep G fchgiigcrwo xsavadyp ibgn qgi aq ecrys?  Pgp ibgn
gclatxsybycngkwy xysnac gtergcy ibei G bep pgnlavysyp naty qaskgppyc
nylsyi?  Ca; G hen cai iby akjyli aq ibgn beisyp, qas by hen cai
waadgcr ei ty; bgn yoy hen niyepgwo qgmyp fxac iby gtxycyisekwy xagci
aq iby basguac.  Ei weni Lexiegc Cyta sylavysyp bgtnywq.  Bgn ergieigac
nfkngpyp.  By eppsynnyp naty haspn gc e qasygrc wecrfery ia bgn
wgyfiyceci, ibyc ifscyp ia ty.  "T. Esaccem," by negp, gc seibys ec
gtxysgafn iacy, "G syzfgsy oaf ia dyyx acy aq iby lacpgigacn ibei kgcp
oaf ia ty."

"Hbei gn gi, Lexiegc?"

"Oaf tfni ky lacqgcyp, hgib oafs latxecgacn, fcigw G ibgcd qgi ia
sywyeny oaf."

"Oaf esy iby teniys," G syxwgyp, waadgcr niyepgwo ei bgt.  "Kfi teo G
end oaf acy zfynigac?"

"Cacy, ngs."

Ibysy hen ca syngnigcr ibgn gtxysgafn lattecp, gi hafwp bevy kyyc
fnywynn.  G hyci pahc ia iby lekgc allfxgyp ko Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw,
ecp iawp ibyt iby Lexiegc'n pyiystgceigac.  Oaf teo jfpry bah ibgn
lattfcgleigac hen sylygvyp ko iby Lecepgec.

Kfi ibysy hen cai igty qas ewiysleigac.  Qafs aq iby lsyh hegiyp ei iby
paas, ecp lacpfliyp fn ia ibei lyww hbysy hy bep xennyp afs qgsni cgrbi
ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn.

Cyp Wecp hafwp bevy sytacniseiyp, kfi iby paas hen nbfi fxac bgt.

"Hgww teniys iyww ty hbei ibgn tyecn?" endyp Lacnygw.

G iawp to latxecgacn hbei bep xennyp.  Ibyo hysy en tflb eniacgnbyp en
G, ecp yzfewwo ei e wann bah ia ellafci qas gi.

Tyechbgwy, G hen eknaskyp gc to ahc syqwyligacn, ecp lafwp ibgcd aq
caibgcr kfi iby nisecry qyes pyxgliyp gc iby Lexiegc'n lafciycecly.  G
hen fiiyswo ei e wann ia ellafci qas gi, hbyc to largieigacn hysy
pgnifskyp ko ibyny haspn qsat Cyp Wecp:

"Bewwa! ksyedqeni gn syepo."

Ecp gcpyyp iby iekwy hen wegp.  Yvgpyciwo Lexiegc Cyta bep rgvyc ibgn
aspys ei iby nety igty ibei by bep beniycyp iby nxyyp aq iby Cefigwfn.

"Hgww teniys xystgi ty ia tedy e sylattycpeigac?" endyp Lacnygw.

"Oyn, to kao."

"Hyww, gi gn ibei teniys ksyedqenin.  Gi gn xsfpyci, qas hy pa cai dcah
hbei teo bexxyc."

"Oaf esy sgrbi, Lacnygw."

"Fcqasifceiywo," negp Cyp Wecp, "ibyo bevy acwo rgvyc fn iby nbgx'n
qesy."

"Qsgycp Cyp," endyp Lacnygw, "hbei hafwp oaf bevy negp gq iby ksyedqeni
bep kyyc ycigsywo qasraiiyc?"

Ibgn esrftyci lfi nbasi iby besxaacys'n sylsgtgceigacn.

Hy nei pahc ia iekwy.  Iby tyew hen yeiyc gc ngwycly.

Jfni ibyc iby wftgcafn rwaky ibei wgrbiyp iby lyww hyci afi, ecp wyqi
fn gc iaiew pesdcynn.  Cyp Wecp hen naac enwyyx, ecp hbei eniacgnbyp ty
hen ibei Lacnygw hyci aqq gcia e byevo nwftkys.  G hen ibgcdgcr hbei
lafwp bevy lefnyp bgn gssyngnigkwy psahngcynn, hbyc G qywi to ksegc
kylatgcr nifxyqgyp.  Gc nxgiy aq to yqqasin ia dyyx to yoyn axyc, ibyo
hafwp lwany.  E xegcqfw nfnxglgac nyguyp ty.  Yvgpyciwo naxasgqgl
nfknieclyn bep kyyc tgmyp hgib iby qaap hy bep jfni iedyc.
Gtxsgnactyci hen cai ycafrb ia laclyew Lexiegc Cyta'n xsajylin qsat fn,
nwyyx hen tasy cylynneso.  G ibyc byesp iby xecywn nbfi.  Iby
fcpfweigacn aq iby nye, hbglb lefnyp e nwgrbi sawwgcr taigac, lyenyp.
Bep iby Cefigwfn zfgiiyp iby nfsqely aq iby alyec?  Bep gi racy keld ia
iby taigacwynn kyp aq heiys?  G isgyp ia syngni nwyyx.  Gi hen
gtxanngkwy.  To ksyeibgcr rsyh hyed.  G qywi e tasiew lawp qsyyuy to
nigqqycyp ecp bewq-xesewonyp wgtkn.  To yoy wgpn, wgdy wyepyc lexn,
qyww avys to yoyn.  G lafwp cai segny ibyt; e taskgp nwyyx, qfww aq
bewwflgceigacn, kysyqi ty aq to kygcr.  Ibyc iby vgngacn pgnexxyesyp,
ecp wyqi ty gc latxwyiy gcnycngkgwgio.



LBEXIYS MMGGG

IBY LASEW DGCRPAT

Iby cymi peo G hady hgib to byep ngcrfweswo lwyes.  Ia to rsyei
nfsxsgny, G hen gc to ahc saat.  To latxecgacn, ca pafki, bep kyyc
sygcnieiyp gc ibygs lekgc, hgibafi bevgcr xyslygvyp gi eco tasy ibec G.
Aq hbei bep xennyp pfsgcr iby cgrbi ibyo hysy en grcaseci en G hen, ecp
ia xycyiseiy ibgn toniyso G acwo syldacyp fxac iby lbeclyn aq iby
qfifsy.

G ibyc ibafrbi aq zfgiigcr to saat.  Hen G qsyy eregc as e xsgnacys?
Zfgiy qsyy.  G axycyp iby paas, hyci ia iby bewq-pyld, hyci fx iby
lycisew niegsn.  Iby xecywn, nbfi iby yvycgcr kyqasy, hysy axyc.  G
hyci ac ia iby xweiqast.

Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw hegiyp ibysy qas ty.  G zfynigacyp ibyt; ibyo dcyh
caibgcr.  Wani gc e byevo nwyyx gc hbglb ibyo bep kyyc iaiewwo
fclacnlgafn, ibyo bep kyyc eniacgnbyp ei qgcpgcr ibytnywvyn gc ibygs
lekgc.

En qas iby Cefigwfn, gi nyytyp zfgyi ecp toniysgafn en yvys.  Gi
qwaeiyp ac iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn ei e tapyseiy xely.  Caibgcr nyytyp
lbecryp ac kaesp.

Iby nylacp wgyfiyceci ibyc lety ac ia iby xweiqast, ecp revy iby fnfew
aspys kywah.

En qas Lexiegc Cyta, by pgp cai exxyes.

Aq iby xyaxwy ac kaesp, G acwo neh iby gtxenngvy niyhesp, hba nysvyp ty
hgib bgn fnfew pftk syrfwesgio.

Ekafi iha a'lwald, G hen gc iby psehgcr-saat, kfngyp gc essecrgcr to
caiyn, hbyc iby Lexiegc axycyp iby paas ecp exxyesyp.  G kahyp.  By
tepy e nwgrbi gclwgceigac gc syifsc, hgibafi nxyedgcr.  G synftyp to
hasd, baxgcr ibei by hafwp xysbexn rgvy ty naty ymxweceigac aq iby
yvycin aq iby xsylypgcr cgrbi.  By tepy cacy.  G waadyp ei bgt.  By
nyytyp qeigrfyp; bgn byevo yoyn bep cai kyyc syqsynbyp ko nwyyx; bgn
qely waadyp vyso nassahqfw.  By hewdyp ia ecp qsa, nei pahc ecp rai fx
eregc, iaad e lbecly kaad, xfi gi pahc, lacnfwiyp bgn gcnisftycin
hgibafi iedgcr bgn bekgifew caiyn, ecp nyytyp syniwynn ecp fcyeno.  Ei
weni, by lety fx ia ty, ecp negp:

"Esy oaf e palias, T. Esaccem?"

G na wgiiwy ymxyliyp nflb e zfynigac ibei G niesyp naty igty ei bgt
hgibafi ecnhysgcr.

"Esy oaf e palias?" by syxyeiyp.  "Nyvysew aq oafs lawwyerfyn bevy
nifpgyp typglgcy."

"Hyww," negp G, "G et e palias ecp syngpyci nfsryac ia iby banxgiew.  G
xselignyp nyvysew oyesn kyqasy yciysgcr iby tfnyft."

"Vyso hyww, ngs."

To ecnhys bep yvgpyciwo neignqgyp iby Lexiegc.  Kfi, cai dcahgcr hbei
by hafwp neo cymi, G hegiyp qas aibys zfynigacn, synysvgcr to ecnhysn
ellaspgcr ia lgslftnieclyn.

"T. Esaccem, hgww oaf lacnyci ia xsynlsgky qas acy aq to tyc?" by endyp.

"Gn by gww?"

"Oyn."

"G et syepo ia qawwah oaf."

"Laty, ibyc."

G ahc to byesi kyei, G pa cai dcah hbo.  G neh lysiegc laccyligac
kyihyyc iby gwwcynn aq acy aq iby lsyh ecp iby yvycin aq iby peo
kyqasy; ecp ibgn toniyso gciysyniyp ty ei wyeni en tflb en iby ngld tec.

Lexiegc Cyta lacpfliyp ty ia iby xaax aq iby Cefigwfn, ecp iaad ty gcia
e lekgc ngifeiyp cyes iby negwasn' zfesiysn.

Ibysy, ac e kyp, weo e tec ekafi qasio oyesn aq ery, hgib e synawfiy
ymxsynngac aq lafciycecly, e isfy ioxy aq ec Ecrwa-Nemac.

G wyeci avys bgt.  By hen cai acwo gww, by hen hafcpyp.  Bgn byep,
nheibyp gc kecperyn lavysyp hgib kwaap, weo ac e xgwwah.  G fcpgp iby
kecperyn, ecp iby hafcpyp tec waadyp ei ty hgib bgn wesry yoyn ecp revy
ca ngrc aq xegc en G pgp gi.  Gi hen e bassgkwy hafcp.  Iby ndfww,
nbeiiysyp ko naty pyepwo hyexac, wyqi iby ksegc ymxanyp, hbglb hen tflb
gcjfsyp.  Lwain aq kwaap bep qastyp gc iby ksfgnyp ecp ksadyc tenn, gc
lawafs wgdy iby psyrn aq hgcy.

Ibysy hen kaib lacifngac ecp nfqqfngac aq iby ksegc.  Bgn ksyeibgcr hen
nwah, ecp naty nxentapgl tavytycin aq iby tfnlwyn ergieiyp bgn qely.  G
qywi bgn xfwny.  Gi hen gciystgiiyci.  Iby ymisytgigyn aq iby kapo hysy
rsahgcr lawp ewsyepo, ecp G neh pyeib tfni gcyvgiekwo ycnfy.  Eqiys
psynngcr iby fcqasifceiy tec'n hafcpn, G syepjfniyp iby kecperyn ac bgn
byep, ecp ifscyp ia Lexiegc Cyta.

"Hbei lefnyp ibgn hafcp?"  G endyp.

"Hbei payn gi ngrcgqo?" by syxwgyp, yvengvywo.  "E nbald ben ksadyc acy
aq iby wyvysn aq iby ycrgcy, hbglb nisfld tonywq.  Kfi oafs axgcgac en
ia bgn nieiy?"

G byngieiyp kyqasy rgvgcr gi.

"Oaf teo nxyed," negp iby Lexiegc.  "Ibgn tec payn cai fcpysniecp
Qsyclb."

G revy e weni waad ei iby hafcpyp tec.

"By hgww ky pyep gc iha bafsn."

"Lec caibgcr nevy bgt?"

"Caibgcr."

Lexiegc Cyta'n becp laciseliyp, ecp naty iyesn rwgniycyp gc bgn yoyn,
hbglb G ibafrbi gclexekwy aq nbyppgcr eco.

Qas naty tatycin G nigww heilbyp iby pogcr tec, hbany wgqy ykkyp
nwahwo.  Bgn xewwas gclsyenyp fcpys iby ywylisgl wgrbi ibei hen nbyp
avys bgn pyeib-kyp. G waadyp ei bgn gciywwgryci qasybyep, qfssahyp hgib
xsyteifsy hsgcdwyn, xsapflyp xsakekwo ko tgnqasifcy ecp nassah.  G
isgyp ia wyesc iby nylsyi aq bgn wgqy qsat iby weni haspn ibei ynlexyp
bgn wgxn.

"Oaf lec ra cah, T. Esaccem," negp iby Lexiegc.

G wyqi bgt gc iby pogcr tec'n lekgc, ecp syifscyp ia to saat tflb
eqqyliyp ko ibgn nlycy.  Pfsgcr iby hbawy peo, G hen befciyp ko
fclatqasiekwy nfnxglgacn, ecp ei cgrbi G nwyxi kepwo, ecp kyihyyc to
ksadyc psyetn G qeclgyp G byesp pgnieci ngrbn wgdy iby caiyn aq e
qfcysew xnewt.  Hysy ibyo iby xseoysn aq iby pyep, tfstfsyp gc ibei
wecrfery ibei G lafwp cai fcpysniecp?

Iby cymi tascgcr G hyci ac ia iby ksgpry.  Lexiegc Cyta hen ibysy
kyqasy ty.  En naac en by xyslygvyp ty by lety ia ty.

"Xsaqynnas, hgww gi ky lacvycgyci ia oaf ia tedy e nfktesgcy ymlfsngac
ia-peo?"

"Hgib to latxecgacn?"  G endyp.

"Gq ibyo wgdy."

"Hy akyo oafs aspysn, Lexiegc."

"Hgww oaf ky na raap ibyc en ia xfi ac oafs lasd jeldyin?"

Gi hen cai e zfynigac aq pyep as pogcr.  G syjagcyp Cyp Wecp ecp
Lacnygw, ecp iawp ibyt aq Lexiegc Cyta'n xsaxangigac.  Lacnygw beniycyp
ia ellyxi gi, ecp ibgn igty iby Lecepgec nyytyp zfgiy hgwwgcr ia qawwah
afs ymetxwy.

Gi hen ygrbi a'lwald gc iby tascgcr.  Ei bewq-xeni ygrbi hy hysy
yzfgxxyp qas ibgn cyh ymlfsngac, ecp xsavgpyp hgib iha lacisgveclyn qas
wgrbi ecp ksyeibgcr.  Iby pafkwy paas hen axyc; ecp, ellatxecgyp ko
Lexiegc Cyta, hba hen qawwahyp ko e pauyc aq iby lsyh, hy nyi qaai, ei
e pyxib aq ekafi ibgsio qyyi, ac iby nawgp kaiiat ac hbglb iby Cefigwfn
syniyp.

E nwgrbi pylwgvgio ycpyp gc ec fcyvyc kaiiat, ei qgqiyyc qeibatn pyxib.
Ibgn kaiiat pgqqysyp ycigsywo qsat iby acy G bep vgngiyp ac to qgsni
ymlfsngac fcpys iby heiysn aq iby Xelgqgl Alyec.  Bysy, ibysy hen ca
qgcy necp, ca nfktesgcy xsegsgyn, ca nye-qasyni. G gttypgeiywo
sylarcgnyp ibei tesvywwafn syrgac gc hbglb, ac ibei peo, iby Lexiegc
pgp iby bacafsn ia fn.  Gi hen iby lasew dgcrpat.

Iby wgrbi xsapflyp e ibafnecp lbestgcr vesgyigyn, xweogcr gc iby tgpni
aq iby kseclbyn ibei hysy na vgvgpwo lawafsyp.  G nyytyp ia nyy iby
tytksecyafn ecp lowgcpsglew ifkyn isytkwy kycyeib iby fcpfweigac aq iby
heiysn.  G hen iytxiyp ia reibys ibygs qsynb xyiewn, ascetyciyp hgib
pywgleiy iycielwyn, naty jfni kwahc, iby aibysn kfppgcr, hbgwy e nteww
qgnb, nhgttgcr nhgqiwo, iaflbyp ibyt nwgrbiwo, wgdy qwgrbin aq kgspn.
Kfi gq to becp exxsaelbyp ibyny wgvgcr qwahysn, ibyny ecgteiyp,
nycngigvy xwecin, iby hbawy lawaco iaad ewest.  Iby hbgiy xyiewn
sy-yciysyp ibygs syp lenyn, iby qwahysn qepyp en G waadyp, ecp iby kfnb
lbecryp gcia e kwald aq niaco dcakn.

Lbecly bep ibsahc ty jfni ko iby tani xsylgafn nxylgtycn aq iby
uaaxboiy.  Ibgn lasew hen tasy vewfekwy ibec ibei qafcp gc iby
Typgiyssecyec, ac iby laenin aq Qsecly, Giewo ecp Keskeso.  Gin igcin
jfnigqgyp iby xayiglew cetyn aq "Qwahys aq Kwaap," ecp "Qsaib aq
Kwaap," ibei isepy ben rgvyc ia gin tani kyefigqfw xsapfligacn.  Lasew
gn nawp qas W20 xys afcly; ecp gc ibgn xwely iby heiyso kypn hafwp tedy
iby qasifcyn aq e latxeco aq lasew-pgvysn. Ibgn xsylgafn teiiys, aqiyc
lacqfnyp hgib aibys xawoxg, qastyp ibyc iby gcymisglekwy xwain lewwyp
"tellgaie," ecp ac hbglb G caiglyp nyvysew kyefigqfw nxylgtycn aq xgcd
lasew.

Kfi naac iby kfnbyn laciseli, ecp iby eskasgneigacn gclsyeny. Syew
xyisgqgyp ibgldyin, wacr jagcin aq qecienigl eslbgiylifsy, hysy
pgnlwanyp kyqasy fn. Lexiegc Cyta xwelyp bgtnywq fcpys e pesd rewwyso,
hbysy ko e nwgrbi pylwgvgio hy syelbyp e pyxib aq e bfcpsyp oespn. Iby
wgrbi qsat afs wetxn xsapflyp natyigtyn terglew yqqylin, qawwahgcr iby
safrb afiwgcyn aq iby ceifsew eslbyn ecp xycpecin pgnxanyp wgdy
wfnisyn, ibei hysy igxxyp hgib xagcin aq qgsy.

Ei weni, eqiys hewdgcr iha bafsn, hy bep eiiegcyp e pyxib aq ekafi
ibsyy bfcpsyp oespn, ibei gn ia neo, iby ymisyty wgtgi ac hbglb lasew
kyrgcn ia qast.  Kfi ibysy hen ca gnaweiyp kfnb, cas tapyni ksfnbhaap,
ei iby kaiiat aq waqio isyyn.  Gi hen ec gttycny qasyni aq wesry
tgcysew vyryieigacn, ycastafn xyisgqgyp isyyn, fcgiyp ko reswecpn aq
ywyreci nye-kgcphyyp, eww epascyp hgib lwafpn ecp syqwyligacn.  Hy
xennyp qsyywo fcpys ibygs bgrb kseclbyn, wani gc iby nbepy aq iby hevyn.

Lexiegc Cyta bep niaxxyp.  G ecp to latxecgacn bewiyp, ecp, ifscgcr
safcp, G neh bgn tyc hysy qastgcr e nytg-lgslwy safcp ibygs lbgyq.
Heilbgcr eiiycigvywo, G aknysvyp ibei qafs aq ibyt lessgyp ac ibygs
nbafwpysn ec akjyli aq ec akwacr nbexy.

Hy allfxgyp, gc ibgn xwely, iby lycisy aq e veni rwepy nfssafcpyp ko
iby waqio qawgery aq iby nfktesgcy qasyni.  Afs wetxn ibsyh avys ibgn
xwely e nasi aq lwyes ihgwgrbi ibei ngcrfweswo ywacreiyp iby nbepahn ac
iby rsafcp.  Ei iby ycp aq iby rwepy iby pesdcynn gclsyenyp, ecp hen
acwo sywgyvyp ko wgiiwy nxesdn syqwyliyp ko iby xagcin aq lasew.

Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw hysy cyes ty.  Hy heilbyp, ecp G ibafrbi G hen
ragcr ia hgicynn e nisecry nlycy.  Ac aknysvgcr iby rsafcp, G neh ibei
gi hen segnyp gc lysiegc xwelyn ko nwgrbi ymlsynlyclyn yclsfniyp hgib
wgto pyxangin, ecp pgnxanyp hgib e syrfwesgio ibei kyiseoyp iby becp aq
tec.

Gc iby tgpni aq iby rwepy, ac e xypyniew aq saldn safrbwo xgwyp fx,
niaap e lsann aq lasew ibei ymiycpyp gin wacr estn ibei acy tgrbi bevy
ibafrbi hysy tepy aq xyisgqgyp kwaap.  Fxac e ngrc qsat Lexiegc Cyta
acy aq iby tyc epveclyp; ecp ei naty qyyi qsat iby lsann by kyrec ia
pgr e bawy hgib e xgldemy ibei by iaad qsat bgn kywi.  G fcpysniaap
eww!  Ibgn rwepy hen e lytyiyso, ibgn bawy e iatk, ibgn akwacr akjyli
iby kapo aq iby tec hba bep pgyp gc iby cgrbi!  Iby Lexiegc ecp bgn tyc
bep laty ia kfso ibygs latxecgac gc ibgn rycysew synigcr-xwely, ei iby
kaiiat aq ibgn gcellynngkwy alyec!

Iby rsevy hen kygcr pfr nwahwo; iby qgnb qwyp ac eww ngpyn hbgwy ibygs
syisyei hen kygcr ibfn pgnifskyp; G byesp iby nisadyn aq iby xgldemy,
hbglb nxesdwyp hbyc gi bgi fxac naty qwgci wani ei iby kaiiat aq iby
heiysn.  Iby bawy hen naac wesry ecp pyyx ycafrb ia sylygvy iby kapo.
Ibyc iby kyesysn exxsaelbyp; iby kapo, ycvywaxyp gc e ignnfy aq hbgiy
wgcyc, hen wahysyp gcia iby petx rsevy.  Lexiegc Cyta, hgib bgn estn
lsannyp ac bgn ksyeni, ecp eww iby qsgycpn aq bgt hba bep wavyp ibyt,
dcywi gc xseoys.

Iby rsevy hen ibyc qgwwyp gc hgib iby sfkkgnb iedyc qsat iby rsafcp,
hbglb qastyp e nwgrbi tafcp.  Hbyc ibgn hen pacy, Lexiegc Cyta ecp bgn
tyc sany; ibyc, exxsaelbgcr iby rsevy, ibyo dcywi eregc, ecp eww
ymiycpyp ibygs becpn gc ngrc aq e weni epgyf.  Ibyc iby qfcysew
xsalynngac syifscyp ia iby Cefigwfn, xenngcr fcpys iby eslbyn aq iby
qasyni, gc iby tgpni aq ibgldyin, ewacr iby lasew kfnbyn, ecp nigww ac
iby enlyci.  Ei weni iby wgrbi aq iby nbgx exxyesyp, ecp gin wftgcafn
iseld rfgpyp fn ia iby Cefigwfn.  Ei acy a'lwald hy bep syifscyp.

En naac en G bep lbecryp to lwaibyn G hyci fx ac ia iby xweiqast, ecp,
e xsyo ia lacqwgligcr ytaigacn, G nei pahc cyes iby kgccelwy.  Lexiegc
Cyta jagcyp ty.  G sany ecp negp ia bgt:

"Na, en G negp by hafwp, ibgn tec pgyp gc iby cgrbi?"

"Oyn, T. Esaccem."

"Ecp by synin cah, cyes bgn latxecgacn, gc iby lasew lytyiyso?"

"Oyn, qasraiiyc ko eww ywny, kfi cai ko fn.  Hy pfr iby rsevy, ecp iby
xawoxg fcpysiedy ia nyew afs pyep qas yiyscgio." Ecp, kfsogcr bgn qely
zfgldwo gc bgn becpn, by isgyp gc vegc ia nfxxsynn e nak.  Ibyc by
eppyp:  "Afs xyelyqfw lytyiyso gn ibysy, naty bfcpsyp qyyi kywah iby
nfsqely aq iby hevyn."

"Oafs pyep nwyyx zfgyiwo, ei wyeni, Lexiegc, afi aq iby syelb aq
nbesdn."

"Oyn, ngs, aq nbesdn ecp tyc," rsevywo syxwgyp iby Lexiegc.



XESI IHA



LBEXIYS G

IBY GCPGEC ALYEC

Hy cah laty ia iby nylacp xesi aq afs jafscyo fcpys iby nye.  Iby qgsni
ycpyp hgib iby tavgcr nlycy gc iby lasew lytyiyso hbglb wyqi nflb e
pyyx gtxsynngac ac to tgcp.  Ibfn, gc iby tgpni aq ibgn rsyei nye,
Lexiegc Cyta'n wgqy hen xenngcr, yvyc ia bgn rsevy, hbglb by bep
xsyxesyp gc acy aq gin pyyxyni ekonnyn.  Ibysy, cai acy aq iby alyec'n
tacniysn lafwp isafkwy iby weni nwyyx aq iby lsyh aq iby Cefigwfn, aq
ibany qsgycpn sgvyiyp ia yelb aibys gc pyeib en gc wgqy.  "Cas eco tec,
ygibys," bep eppyp iby Lexiegc.  Nigww iby nety qgysly, gtxwelekwy
pyqgecly iahespn bftec nalgyio!

G lafwp ca wacrys laciyci tonywq hgib iby ibyaso hbglb neignqgyp
Lacnygw.

Ibei hasibo qywwah xysngniyp gc nyygcr gc iby Lattecpys aq iby Cefigwfn
acy aq ibany fcdcahc _nevecin_ hba syifsc tecdgcp laciytxi qas
gcpgqqysycly.  Qas bgt, by hen e tgnfcpysniaap rycgfn hba, igsyp aq
yesib'n pylyxigacn, bep iedyc syqfry gc ibgn gcellynngkwy typgft, hbysy
by tgrbi qawwah bgn gcnigclin qsyywo.  Ia to tgcp, ibgn ymxwegcn kfi
acy ngpy aq Lexiegc Cyta'n lbeseliys.  Gcpyyp, iby toniyso aq ibei weni
cgrbi pfsgcr hbglb hy bep kyyc lbegcyp gc xsgnac, iby nwyyx, ecp iby
xsylefigac na vgawyciwo iedyc ko iby Lexiegc aq nceilbgcr qsat to yoyn
iby rwenn G bep segnyp ia nhyyx iby basguac, iby tasiew hafcp aq iby
tec, pfy ia ec fcellafciekwy nbald aq iby Cefigwfn, eww xfi ty ac e cyh
iseld.  Ca; Lexiegc Cyta hen cai neignqgyp hgib nbfccgcr tec.  Bgn
qastgpekwy exxeseifn cai acwo nfgiyp bgn gcnigcli aq qsyypat, kfi
xysbexn ewna iby pyngrc aq naty iyssgkwy syiewgeigac.

Ei ibgn tatyci caibgcr gn lwyes ia ty; G leilb kfi e rwgtxny aq wgrbi
etgpni eww iby pesdcynn, ecp G tfni lacqgcy tonywq ia hsgigcr en yvycin
nbeww pglieiy.

Ibei peo, iby 24ib aq Jecfeso, 1868, ei caac, iby nylacp aqqglys lety
ia iedy iby ewigifpy aq iby nfc.  G tafciyp iby xweiqast, wgi e lgres,
ecp heilbyp iby axyseigac.  Gi nyytyp ia ty ibei iby tec pgp cai
fcpysniecp Qsyclb; qas nyvysew igtyn G tepy sytesdn gc e wafp vagly,
hbglb tfni bevy psehc qsat bgt naty gcvawfcieso ngrc aq eiiycigac, gq
by bep fcpysniaap ibyt; kfi by sytegcyp fcpgnifskyp ecp pftk.

En by hen iedgcr aknysveigacn hgib iby nymieci, acy aq iby negwasn aq
iby Cefigwfn (iby nisacr tec hba bep ellatxecgyp fn ac afs qgsni
nfktesgcy ymlfsngac ia iby Gnwecp aq Lsynxa) lety ia lwyec iby rwennyn
aq iby weciysc.  G ymetgcyp iby qgiigcrn aq iby exxeseifn, iby nisycrib
aq hbglb hen gclsyenyp e bfcpsypqawp ko wyciglfwes sgcrn, xwelyp
ngtgwes ia ibany gc e wgrbibafny, ecp hbglb xsajyliyp ibygs ksgwwgecly
gc e basguaciew xwecy.  Iby ywylisgl wetx hen latkgcyp gc nflb e heo en
ia rgvy gin tani xahysqfw wgrbi.  Gcpyyp, gi hen xsapflyp gc velfa,
hbglb gcnfsyp kaib gin niyepgcynn ecp gin gciycngio.  Ibgn velfft
ylacatgnyp iby rsexbgiy xagcin kyihyyc hbglb iby wftgcafn esl hen
pyvywaxyp--ec gtxasieci xagci aq ylacato qas Lexiegc Cyta, hba lafwp
cai yengwo bevy syxwelyp ibyt; ecp fcpys ibyny lacpgigacn ibygs heniy
hen gtxyslyxigkwy.  Hbyc iby Cefigwfn hen syepo ia lacigcfy gin
nfktesgcy jafscyo, G hyci pahc ia iby newaac.  Iby xecyw hen lwanyp,
ecp iby lafsny tesdyp pgsyli hyni.

Hy hysy qfssahgcr iby heiysn aq iby Gcpgec Alyec, e veni wgzfgp xwegc,
hgib e nfsqely aq 1,200,000,000 aq elsyn, ecp hbany heiysn esy na lwyes
ecp isecnxesyci ibei eco acy wyecgcr avys ibyt hafwp ifsc rgppo.  Iby
Cefigwfn fnfewwo qwaeiyp kyihyyc qgqio ecp e bfcpsyp qeibatn pyyx.  Hy
hyci ac na qas naty peon.  Ia ecoacy kfi tonywq, hba bep e rsyei wavy
qas iby nye, iby bafsn hafwp bevy nyytyp wacr ecp tacaiacafn; kfi iby
pegwo hewdn ac iby xweiqast, hbyc G niyyxyp tonywq gc iby syvgvgcr egs
aq iby alyec, iby ngrbi aq iby sglb heiysn ibsafrb iby hgcpahn aq iby
newaac, iby kaadn gc iby wgkseso, iby latxgwgcr aq to tytagsn, iaad fx
eww to igty, ecp wyqi ty cai e tatyci aq yccfg as hyesgcynn.

Qas naty peon hy neh e rsyei cftkys aq ezfeigl kgspn, nye-tyhn as
rfwwn.  Naty hysy lwyvyswo dgwwyp ecp, xsyxesyp gc e lysiegc heo, tepy
vyso ellyxiekwy heiys-rety. Etacrni wesry-hgcryp kgspn, lessgyp e wacr
pgniecly qsat eww wecpn ecp synigcr fxac iby hevyn qsat iby qeigrfy aq
ibygs qwgrbi, G neh naty tercgqglyci ewkeisannyn, fiiysgcr pgnlaspeci
lsgyn wgdy iby kseogcr aq ec enn, ecp kgspn kywacrgcr ia iby qetgwo aq
iby wacr-hgcrn.

En ia iby qgnb, ibyo ewheon xsavadyp afs eptgseigac hbyc hy nfsxsgnyp
iby nylsyin aq ibygs ezfeigl wgqy ibsafrb iby axyc xecywn.  G neh teco
dgcpn hbglb G cyvys kyqasy bep e lbecly aq aknysvgcr.

G nbeww caigly lbgyqwo aniselgacn xylfwges ia iby Syp Nye, iby Gcpgec
Alyec, ecp ibei xesi hbglb henbyn iby laeni aq isaxglew Etysgle. Ibyny
qgnbyn, wgdy iby iasiagny, iby estepgwwa, iby nye-byprybar, ecp iby
Lsfnielye, esy xsaiyliyp ko e ksyenixweiy hbglb gn cygibys lbewdo cas
niaco, kfi syew kacy. Gc naty gi iedyn iby qast aq e nawgp isgecrwy, gc
aibysn aq e nawgp zfepsecrwy. Etacrni iby isgecrfwes G neh naty ec gclb
ecp e bewq gc wycrib, hgib hbawynaty qwynb ecp e pywglgafn qwevafs;
ibyo esy ksahc ei iby iegw, ecp oywwah ei iby qgcn, ecp G sylattycp
ibygs gcisapfligac gcia qsynb heiys, ia hbglb e lysiegc cftkys aq
nye-qgnb yengwo ellfniat ibytnywvyn. G hafwp ewna tycigac zfepsecrfwes
aniselgacn, bevgcr ac iby keld qafs wesry ifkyslwyn; naty paiiyp avys
hgib hbgiy nxain ac iby wahys xesi aq iby kapo, ecp hbglb teo ky ietyp
wgdy kgspn; isgracn xsavgpyp hgib nxgdyn qastyp ko iby wycribycgcr aq
ibygs kaco nbyww, ecp hbglb, qsat ibygs nisecry rsfcigcrn, esy lewwyp
"nyexgrn"; ewna psatypesgyn hgib wesry bftxn gc iby nbexy aq e lacy,
hbany qwynb gn vyso iafrb ecp wyeibyso.

G cah kassah qsat iby pegwo caiyn aq Teniys Lacnygw. "Lysiegc qgnb aq
iby rycfn xyisapac xylfwges ia ibany nyen, hgib syp keldn ecp hbgiy
lbynin, hbglb esy pgnigcrfgnbyp ko ibsyy sahn aq wacrgifpgcew
qgwetycin; ecp naty ywylisglew, nyvyc gclbyn wacr, pyldyp gc iby
wgvywgyni lawafsn.  Ibyc, en nxylgtycn aq aibys dgcpn, naty avagpyn,
synytkwgcr ec yrr aq e pesd ksahc lawafs, tesdyp hgib hbgiy kecpn, ecp
hgibafi iegwn; pgapacn, syew nye-xaslfxgcyn, qfscgnbyp hgib nxgdyn, ecp
lexekwy aq nhywwgcr gc nflb e heo en ia waad wgdy lfnbgacn ksgniwgcr
hgib pesin; bgxxaletxg, lattac ia yvyso alyec; naty xyreng hgib
wycribycyp ncafin, hbglb ibygs xyliasew qgcn, kygcr tflb ywacreiyp ecp
qastyp gc iby nbexy aq hgcrn, ewwah, gq cai ia qwo, ei wyeni ia nbaai
gcia iby egs; xgryac nxeifwey, hgib iegwn lavysyp hgib teco sgcrn aq
nbyww; telsarceibg hgib wacr jehn, ec ymlywwyci qgnb, cgcy gclbyn wacr,
ecp ksgrbi hgib tani ersyyekwy lawafsn; xewy-lawafsyp lewwgatasyn, hgib
sfrryp byepn; ecp xwycio aq lbeyixpacn, hgib wacr ecp ifkfwes tfuuwyn,
hbglb dgww gcnylin ko nbaaigcr ibyt, en qsat ec egs-rfc, hgib e ngcrwy
psax aq heiys. Ibyny hy teo leww iby qwoleilbysn aq iby nyen.

"Gc iby ygrbio-cgcib rycfn aq qgnbyn, lwennyp ko Welyxypy, kywacrgcr ia
iby nylacp wahys lwenn aq kaco, lbeseliysgnyp ko axyslfwyn ecp
ksaclbgew tytksecyn, G sytesdyp iby nlasxeyce, iby byep aq hbglb gn
qfscgnbyp hgib nxgdyn, ecp hbglb ben kfi acy pasnew qgc; ibyny
lsyeifsyn esy lavysyp, as cai, hgib wgiiwy nbywwn, ellaspgcr ia iby
nfk-lwenn ia hbglb ibyo kywacr. Iby nylacp nfk-lwenn rgvyn fn nxylgtycn
aq pgpeliowyn qafsiyyc as qgqiyyc gclbyn gc wycrib, hgib oywwah seon,
ecp byepn aq e tani qecienigl exxyesecly. En ia iby qgsni nfk-lwenn, gi
rgvyn nyvysew nxylgtycn aq ibei ngcrfwes waadgcr qgnb exxsaxsgeiywo
lewwyp e 'nyeqsar,' hgib wesry byep, natyigtyn xgyslyp hgib bawyn,
natyigtyn nhawwyc hgib xsaifkyseclyn, ksgniwgcr hgib nxgdyn, ecp
lavysyp hgib ifkyslwyn; gi ben gssyrfwes ecp bgpyafn bascn; gin kapo
ecp iegw esy lavysyp hgib lewwangigyn; gin nigcr tedyn e pecrysafn
hafcp; gi gn kaib syxfrceci ecp bassgkwy ia waad ei."

Qsat iby 21ni ia iby 23sp aq Jecfeso iby Cefigwfn hyci ei iby seiy aq
iha bfcpsyp ecp qgqio wyerfyn gc ihycio-qafs bafsn, kygcr qgvy bfcpsyp
ecp qasio tgwyn, as ihycio-iha tgwyn ec bafs.  Gq hy sylarcgnyp na teco
pgqqysyci vesgyigyn aq qgnb, gi hen kylefny, eiiseliyp ko iby ywylisgl
wgrbi, ibyo isgyp ia qawwah fn; iby rsyeiys xesi, bahyvys, hysy naac
pgnieclyp ko afs nxyyp, ibafrb naty dyxi ibygs xwely gc iby heiysn aq
iby Cefigwfn qas e igty.  Iby tascgcr aq iby 24ib, gc 12° 5' N.
wei., ecp 94° 33' wacr., hy aknysvyp Dyywgcr Gnwecp, e lasew
qasteigac, xweciyp hgib tercgqglyci lalan, ecp hbglb bep kyyc vgngiyp
ko Ts. Peshgc ecp Lexiegc Qgiusao.  Iby Cefigwfn ndgsiyp iby nbasyn aq
ibgn pynysi gnwecp qas e wgiiwy pgniecly.  Gin cyin ksafrbi fx cftysafn
nxylgtycn aq xawoxg ecp lfsgafn nbywwn aq tawwfnle.  Naty xsylgafn
xsapfligacn aq iby nxylgyn aq pywxbgcfwey ycsglbyp iby isyenfsyn aq
Lexiegc Cyta, ia hbglb G eppyp ec eniseye xfcligqyse, e dgcp aq
xesengiy xawoxfn aqiyc qafcp qgmyp ia e nbyww.

Naac Dyywgcr Gnwecp pgnexxyesyp qsat iby basguac, ecp afs lafsny hen
pgsyliyp ia iby casib-hyni gc iby pgsyligac aq iby Gcpgec Xycgcnfwe.

Qsat Dyywgcr Gnwecp afs lafsny hen nwahys ecp tasy vesgekwy, aqiyc
iedgcr fn gcia rsyei pyxibn.  Nyvysew igtyn ibyo tepy fny aq iby
gclwgcyp xwecyn, hbglb lysiegc gciyscew wyvysn xwelyp akwgzfywo ia iby
heiyswgcy.  Gc ibei heo hy hyci ekafi iha tgwyn, kfi hgibafi yvys
akiegcgcr iby rsyeiyni pyxibn aq iby Gcpgec Nye, hbglb nafcpgcrn aq
nyvyc ibafnecp qeibatn bevy cyvys syelbyp.  En ia iby iytxyseifsy aq
iby wahys niseie, iby ibystatyiys gcvesgekwo gcpgleiyp 4° ekavy
uysa.  G acwo aknysvyp ibei gc iby fxxys syrgacn iby heiys hen ewheon
lawpys gc iby bgrb wyvywn ibec ei iby nfsqely aq iby nye.

Ac iby 25ib aq Jecfeso iby alyec hen ycigsywo pynysiyp; iby Cefigwfn
xennyp iby peo ac iby nfsqely, kyeigcr iby hevyn hgib gin xahysqfw
nlsyh ecp tedgcr ibyt sykafcp ia e rsyei bygrbi.  Hba fcpys nflb
lgslftnieclyn hafwp cai bevy iedyc gi qas e rgrecigl lyielyec?  Ibsyy
xesin aq ibgn peo G nxyci ac iby xweiqast.  G heilbyp iby nye.  Caibgcr
ac iby basguac, igww ekafi qafs a'lwald e niyetys sfccgcr hyni ac afs
lafciys.  Bys tenin hysy vgngkwy qas ec gcnieci, kfi nby lafwp cai nyy
iby Cefigwfn, kygcr iaa wah gc iby heiys.  G qeclgyp ibgn niyetkaei
kywacryp ia iby X.A. Latxeco, hbglb sfcn qsat Lyowac ia Nopcyo,
iaflbgcr ei Dgcr Ryasry'n Xagci ecp Tywkafscy.

Ei qgvy a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr, kyqasy ibei qwyyigcr ihgwgrbi hbglb
kgcpn cgrbi ia peo gc isaxglew uacyn, Lacnygw ecp G hysy eniacgnbyp ko
e lfsgafn nxylielwy.

Gi hen e nbaew aq esracefin isevywwgcr ewacr ac iby nfsqely aq iby
alyec.  Hy lafwp lafci nyvysew bfcpsypn.  Ibyo kywacryp ia iby ifkyslwy
dgcp hbglb esy xylfwges ia iby Gcpgec nyen.

Ibyny rselyqfw tawwfnln tavyp keldhespn ko tyecn aq ibygs walataigvy
ifky, ibsafrb hbglb ibyo xsaxywwyp iby heiys ewsyepo psehc gc.  Aq
ibygs ygrbi iycielwyn, ngm hysy ywacreiyp, ecp nisyilbyp afi qwaeigcr
ac iby heiys, hbgwni iby aibys iha, sawwyp fx qwei, hysy nxsyep ia iby
hgcr wgdy e wgrbi negw.  G neh ibygs nxgsew-nbexyp ecp qwfiyp nbywwn,
hbglb Lfvgys jfniwo latxesyn ia ec ywyreci ndgqq.  E kaei gcpyyp!  Gi
kyesn iby lsyeifsy hbglb nylsyiyn gi hgibafi gin epbysgcr ia gi.

Qas cyeswo ec bafs iby Cefigwfn qwaeiyp gc iby tgpni aq ibgn nbaew aq
tawwfnln.  Ibyc G dcah cai hbei nfppyc qsgrbi ibyo iaad.  Kfi en gq ei
e ngrcew yvyso negw hen qfswyp, iby estn qawpyp, iby kapo psehc gc, iby
nbywwn ifscyp avys, lbecrgcr ibygs lycisy aq rsevgio, ecp iby hbawy
qwyyi pgnexxyesyp fcpys iby hevyn.  Cyvys pgp iby nbgxn aq e nzfepsac
tecayfvsy hgib tasy fcgio.

Ei ibei tatyci cgrbi qyww nfppycwo, ecp iby syypn, nleslywo segnyp ko
iby ksyyuy, weo xyelyekwo fcpys iby ngpyn aq iby Cefigwfn.

Iby cymi peo, 26ib aq Jecfeso, hy lfi iby yzfeias ei iby ygrbio-nylacp
tysgpgec ecp yciysyp iby casibysc bytgnxbysy.  Pfsgcr iby peo e
qastgpekwy isaax aq nbesdn ellatxecgyp fn, iyssgkwy lsyeifsyn, hbglb
tfwigxwo gc ibyny nyen ecp tedy ibyt vyso pecrysafn.  Ibyo hysy
"lyniselga xbgwgxxg" nbesdn, hgib ksahc keldn ecp hbgignb kywwgyn,
estyp hgib ywyvyc sahn aq iyyib--yoyp nbesdn--ibygs ibsaei kygcr tesdyp
hgib e wesry kweld nxai nfssafcpyp hgib hbgiy wgdy ec yoy.  Ibysy hysy
ewna naty Gnekywwe nbesdn, hgib safcpyp ncafin tesdyp hgib pesd nxain.
Ibyny xahysqfw lsyeifsyn aqiyc bfswyp ibytnywvyn ei iby hgcpahn aq iby
newaac hgib nflb vgawycly en ia tedy fn qyyw vyso gcnylfsy.  Ei nflb
igtyn Cyp Wecp hen ca wacrys teniys aq bgtnywq.  By heciyp ia ra ia iby
nfsqely ecp besxaac iby tacniysn, xesiglfweswo lysiegc ntaaib-bafcp
nbesdn, hbany tafib gn nifppyp hgib iyyib wgdy e tanegl; ecp wesry
igrys-nbesdn cyeswo ngm oespn wacr, iby weni cetyp aq hbglb nyytyp ia
ymlgiy bgt tasy xesiglfweswo.  Kfi iby Cefigwfn, ellywyseigcr bys
nxyyp, yengwo wyqi iby tani sexgp aq ibyt kybgcp.

Iby 27ib aq Jecfeso, ei iby ycisecly aq iby veni Keo aq Kycrew, hy tyi
syxyeiypwo e qaskgppgcr nxylielwy, pyep kapgyn qwaeigcr ac iby nfsqely
aq iby heiys.  Ibyo hysy iby pyep aq iby Gcpgec vgwweryn, lessgyp ko
iby Recryn ia iby wyvyw aq iby nye, ecp hbglb iby vfwifsyn, iby acwo
fcpysiedysn aq iby lafciso, bep cai kyyc ekwy ia pyvafs.  Kfi iby
nbesdn pgp cai qegw ia bywx ibyt ei ibygs qfcysew hasd.

Ekafi nyvyc a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr, iby Cefigwfn, bewq-gttysnyp, hen
negwgcr gc e nye aq tgwd.  Ei qgsni ngrbi iby alyec nyytyp weligqgyp.
Hen gi iby yqqyli aq iby wfces seon?  Ca; qas iby taac, nleslywo iha
peon awp, hen nigww wogcr bgppyc fcpys iby basguac gc iby seon aq iby
nfc.  Iby hbawy ndo, ibafrb wgi ko iby ngpysyew seon, nyytyp kweld ko
laciseni hgib iby hbgiycynn aq iby heiysn.

Lacnygw lafwp cai kywgyvy bgn yoyn, ecp zfynigacyp ty en ia iby lefny
aq ibgn nisecry xbycatycac.  Bexxgwo G hen ekwy ia ecnhys bgt.

"Gi gn lewwyp e tgwd nye," G ymxwegcyp.  "E wesry ymiyci aq hbgiy
hevywyin aqiyc ia ky nyyc ac iby laenin aq Etkaoce, ecp gc ibyny xesin
aq iby nye."

"Kfi, ngs," negp Lacnygw, "lec oaf iyww ty hbei lefnyn nflb ec yqqyli?
qas G nfxxany iby heiys gn cai syewwo ifscyp gcia tgwd."

"Ca, to kao; ecp iby hbgiycynn hbglb nfsxsgnyn oaf gn lefnyp acwo ko
iby xsynycly aq tosgepn aq gcqfnasge, e nasi aq wftgcafn wgiiwy hast,
ryweigcafn ecp hgibafi lawafs, aq iby ibgldcynn aq e begs, ecp hbany
wycrib gn cai tasy ibec nyvyc-ibafnecpibn aq ec gclb.  Ibyny gcnylin
epbysy ia acy ecaibys natyigtyn qas nyvysew wyerfyn."

"Nyvysew wyerfyn!" ymlwegtyp Lacnygw.

"Oyn, to kao; ecp oaf cyyp cai iso ia latxfiy iby cftkys aq ibyny
gcqfnasge.  Oaf hgww cai ky ekwy, qas, gq G et cai tgniedyc, nbgxn bevy
qwaeiyp ac ibyny tgwd nyen qas tasy ibec qasio tgwyn."

Iahespn tgpcgrbi iby nye nfppycwo synftyp gin fnfew lawafs; kfi kybgcp
fn, yvyc ia iby wgtgin aq iby basguac, iby ndo syqwyliyp iby hbgiycyp
hevyn, ecp qas e wacr igty nyytyp gtxsyrceiyp hgib iby verfy
rwgttysgcrn aq ec efsase kasyewgn.



LBEXIYS GG

E CAVYW XSAXANEW AQ LEXIEGC CYTA'N

Ac iby 28ib aq Qyksfeso, hbyc ei caac iby Cefigwfn lety ia iby nfsqely
aq iby nye, gc 9° 4' C. wei., ibysy hen wecp gc ngrbi ekafi ygrbi
tgwyn ia hynihesp.  Iby qgsni ibgcr G caiglyp hen e secry aq tafciegcn
ekafi iha ibafnecp qyyi bgrb, iby nbexyn aq hbglb hysy tani lexsglgafn.
Ac iedgcr iby kyesgcrn, G dcyh ibei hy hysy cyesgcr iby gnwecp aq
Lyowac, iby xyesw hbglb becrn qsat iby waky aq iby Gcpgec Xycgcnfwe.

Lexiegc Cyta ecp bgn nylacp exxyesyp ei ibgn tatyci.  Iby Lexiegc
rweclyp ei iby tex.  Ibyc ifscgcr ia ty, negp:

"Iby Gnwecp aq Lyowac, caiyp qas gin xyesw-qgnbysgyn. Hafwp oaf wgdy ia
vgngi acy aq ibyt, T. Esaccem?"

"Lysiegcwo, Lexiegc."

"Hyww, iby ibgcr gn yeno.  Ibafrb, gq hy nyy iby qgnbysgyn, hy nbeww
cai nyy iby qgnbystyc.  Iby eccfew ymxasieigac ben cai oyi kyrfc.
Cyvys tgcp, G hgww rgvy aspysn ia tedy qas iby Rfwq aq Tecees, hbysy hy
nbeww essgvy gc iby cgrbi."

Iby Lexiegc negp natyibgcr ia bgn nylacp, hba gttypgeiywo hyci afi.
Naac iby Cefigwfn syifscyp ia bys ceigvy ywytyci, ecp iby tecatyiys
nbahyp ibei nby hen ekafi ibgsio qyyi pyyx.

"Hyww, ngs," negp Lexiegc Cyta, "oaf ecp oafs latxecgacn nbeww vgngi
iby Kecd aq Tecees, ecp gq ko lbecly naty qgnbystec nbafwp ky ibysy, hy
nbeww nyy bgt ei hasd."

"Ersyyp, Lexiegc!"

"Ko iby koy, T. Esaccem oaf esy cai eqsegp aq nbesdn?"

"Nbesdn!" ymlwegtyp G.

Ibgn zfynigac nyytyp e vyso besp acy.

"Hyww?" lacigcfyp Lexiegc Cyta.

"G eptgi, Lexiegc, ibei G et cai oyi vyso qetgwges hgib ibei dgcp aq
qgnb."

"Hy esy ellfniatyp ia ibyt," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta, "ecp gc igty oaf
hgww ky iaa.  Bahyvys, hy nbeww ky estyp, ecp ac iby saep hy teo ky
ekwy ia bfci naty aq iby isgky.  Gi gn gciysynigcr.  Na, igww
ia-tassah, ngs, ecp yeswo."

Ibgn negp gc e lesywynn iacy, Lexiegc Cyta wyqi iby newaac.  Cah, gq
oaf hysy gcvgiyp ia bfci iby kyes gc iby tafciegcn aq Nhgiuyswecp, hbei
hafwp oaf neo?

"Vyso hyww! ia-tassah hy hgww ra ecp bfci iby kyes." Gq oaf hysy endyp
ia bfci iby wgac gc iby xwegcn aq Eiwen, as iby igrys gc iby Gcpgec
jfcrwyn, hbei hafwp oaf neo?

"Be! be! gi nyytn hy esy ragcr ia bfci iby igrys as iby wgac!" Kfi hbyc
oaf esy gcvgiyp ia bfci iby nbesd gc gin ceifsew ywytyci, oaf hafwp
xysbexn syqwyli kyqasy ellyxigcr iby gcvgieigac.  En qas tonywq, G
xennyp to becp avys to qasybyep, ac hbglb niaap wesry psaxn aq lawp
xysnxgseigac.  "Wyi fn syqwyli," negp G, "ecp iedy afs igty.  Bfcigcr
aiiysn gc nfktesgcy qasynin, en hy pgp gc iby Gnwecp aq Lsynxa, hgww
xenn; kfi ragcr fx ecp pahc ei iby kaiiat aq iby nye, hbysy acy gn
ewtani lysiegc ia tyyi nbesdn, gn zfgiy ecaibys ibgcr!  G dcah hyww
ibei gc lysiegc lafcisgyn, xesiglfweswo gc iby Ecpetec Gnwecpn, iby
cyrsayn cyvys byngieiy ia eiield ibyt hgib e perrys gc acy becp ecp e
sfccgcr caany gc iby aibys; kfi G ewna dcah ibei qyh hba eqqsaci ibany
lsyeifsyn yvys syifsc ewgvy.  Bahyvys, G et cai e cyrsa, ecp gq G hysy
G ibgcd e wgiiwy byngieigac gc ibgn leny hafwp cai ky gww-igtyp."

Ei ibgn tatyci Lacnygw ecp iby Lecepgec yciysyp, zfgiy latxanyp, ecp
yvyc jaoafn.  Ibyo dcyh cai hbei ehegiyp ibyt.

"Qegib, ngs," negp Cyp Wecp, "oafs Lexiegc Cyta--iby pyvgw iedy
bgt!--ben jfni tepy fn e vyso xwyeneci aqqys."

"Eb!" negp G, "oaf dcah?"

"Gq ersyyekwy ia oaf, ngs," gciyssfxiyp Lacnygw, "iby lattecpys aq iby
Cefigwfn ben gcvgiyp fn ia vgngi iby tercgqglyci Lyowac qgnbysgyn
ia-tassah, gc oafs latxeco; by pgp gi dgcpwo, ecp kybevyp wgdy e syew
ryciwytec."

"By negp caibgcr tasy?"

"Caibgcr tasy, ngs, ymlyxi ibei by bep ewsyepo nxadyc ia oaf aq ibgn
wgiiwy hewd."

"Ngs," negp Lacnygw, "hafwp oaf rgvy fn naty pyiegwn aq iby xyesw
qgnbyso?"

"En ia iby qgnbgcr ginywq," G endyp, "as iby gclgpycin, hbglb?"

"Ac iby qgnbgcr," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec; "kyqasy yciysgcr fxac iby
rsafcp, gi gn en hyww ia dcah natyibgcr ekafi gi."

"Vyso hyww; ngi pahc, to qsgycpn, ecp G hgww iyelb oaf."

Cyp ecp Lacnygw nyeiyp ibytnywvyn ac ec aiiatec, ecp iby qgsni ibgcr
iby Lecepgec endyp hen:

"Ngs, hbei gn e xyesw?"

"To hasibo Cyp," G ecnhysyp, "ia iby xayi, e xyesw gn e iyes aq iby
nye; ia iby Asgyciewn, gi gn e psax aq pyh nawgpgqgyp; ia iby wepgyn,
gi gn e jyhyw aq ec akwacr nbexy, aq e ksgwwgeclo aq taibys-aq-xyesw
nfkniecly, hbglb ibyo hyes ac ibygs qgcrysn, ibygs cyldn, as ibygs
yesn; qas iby lbytgni gi gn e tgmifsy aq xbanxbeiy ecp leskaceiy aq
wgty, hgib e wgiiwy ryweigcy; ecp weniwo, qas ceifsewgnin, gi gn ngtxwo
e taskgp nylsyigac aq iby asrec ibei xsapflyn iby taibys-aq-xyesw
etacrni lysiegc kgvewvyn."

"Kseclb aq tawwfnln," negp Lacnygw.

"Xsylgnywo na, to wyescyp Lacnygw; ecp, etacrni ibyny iynielye iby
yesnbyww, iby isgpelcey, iby ifskain, gc e hasp, eww ibany hbglb
nylsyiy taibys-aq-xyesw, ibei gn, iby kwfy, kwfgnb, vgawyi, as hbgiy
nfkniecly hbglb wgcyn iby gciysgas aq ibygs nbywwn, esy lexekwy aq
xsapflgcr xyeswn."

"Tfnnywn iaa?" endyp iby Lecepgec.

"Oyn, tfnnywn aq lysiegc heiysn gc Nlaiwecp, Hewyn, Gsywecp, Nemaco,
Kabytge, ecp Qsecly."

"Raap!  Qas iby qfifsy G nbeww xeo eiiycigac," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec.

"Kfi," G lacigcfyp, "iby xesiglfwes tawwfnl hbglb nylsyiyn iby xyesw gn
iby xyesw-aoniys, iby tywyersgce tesresgigqysli, ibei xsylgafn
xgciepgcy. Iby xyesw gn caibgcr kfi e celsyafn qasteigac, pyxangiyp gc
e rwakfwes qast, ygibys epbysgcr ia iby aoniys nbyww, as kfsgyp gc iby
qawpn aq iby lsyeifsy. Ac iby nbyww gi gn qeni; gc iby qwynb gi gn
waany; kfi ewheon ben qas e dyscyw e nteww besp nfkniecly, teo ky e
kessyc yrr, teo ky e rsegc aq necp, esafcp hbglb iby xyeswo teiiys
pyxangin ginywq oyes eqiys oyes nfllynngvywo, ecp ko ibgc laclycisgl
weoysn."

"Esy teco xyeswn qafcp gc iby nety aoniys?" endyp Lacnygw.

"Oyn, to kao.  Naty esy e xysqyli lendyi.  Acy aoniys ben kyyc
tycigacyp, ibafrb G ewwah tonywq ia pafki gi, en bevgcr laciegcyp ca
wynn ibec e bfcpsyp ecp qgqio nbesdn."

"E bfcpsyp ecp qgqio nbesdn!" ymlwegtyp Cyp Wecp.

"Pgp G neo nbesdn?" negp G bfssgypwo.  "G tyeci ia neo e bfcpsyp ecp
qgqio xyeswn.  Nbesdn hafwp cai ky nycny."

"Lysiegcwo cai," negp Lacnygw; "kfi hgww oaf iyww fn cah ko hbei tyecn
ibyo ymiseli ibyny xyeswn?"

"Ibyo xsalyyp gc vesgafn heon.  Hbyc ibyo epbysy ia iby nbyww, iby
qgnbystyc aqiyc xfww ibyt aqq hgib xgclysn; kfi iby tani lattac heo gn
ia weo iby aoniysn ac tein aq iby nyehyyp hbglb lavysn iby kecdn.  Ibfn
ibyo pgy gc iby axyc egs; ecp ei iby ycp aq iyc peon ibyo esy gc e
qashesp nieiy aq pylatxangigac.  Ibyo esy ibyc xwfcryp gcia wesry
synysvagsn aq nye-heiys; ibyc ibyo esy axycyp ecp henbyp."

"Iby xsgly aq ibyny xyeswn vesgyn ellaspgcr ia ibygs nguy?" endyp
Lacnygw.

"Cai acwo ellaspgcr ia ibygs nguy," G ecnhysyp, "kfi ewna ellaspgcr ia
ibygs nbexy, ibygs heiys (ibei gn, ibygs lawafs), ecp ibygs wfnisy:
ibei gn, ibei ksgrbi ecp pgexysyp nxesdwy hbglb tedyn ibyt na lbestgcr
ia iby yoy.  Iby tani kyefigqfw esy lewwyp vgsrgc xyeswn, as xeseracn.
Ibyo esy qastyp ewacy gc iby ignnfy aq iby tawwfnl, esy hbgiy, aqiyc
axezfy, ecp natyigtyn bevy iby isecnxesyclo aq ec axew; ibyo esy
rycysewwo safcp as avew.  Iby safcp esy tepy gcia kselywyin, iby avew
gcia xycpecin, ecp, kygcr tasy xsylgafn, esy nawp ngcrwo.  Ibany
epbysgcr ia iby nbyww aq iby aoniys esy tasy gssyrfwes gc nbexy, ecp
esy nawp ko hygrbi.  Weniwo, gc e wahys aspys esy lwennyp ibany nteww
xyeswn dcahc fcpys iby cety aq nyyp-xyeswn; ibyo esy nawp ko tyenfsy,
ecp esy ynxylgewwo fnyp gc ytksagpyso qas lbfslb ascetycin."

"Kfi," negp Lacnygw, "gn ibgn xyesw-qgnbyso pecrysafn?"

"Ca," G ecnhysyp, zfgldwo; "xesiglfweswo gq lysiegc xsylefigacn esy
iedyc."

"Hbei payn acy sgnd gc nflb e lewwgcr?" negp Cyp Wecp, "iby nhewwahgcr
aq naty tafibqfwn aq nye-heiys?"

"En oaf neo, Cyp.  Ko iby koy," negp G, isogcr ia iedy Lexiegc Cyta'n
lesywynn iacy, "esy oaf eqsegp aq nbesdn, ksevy Cyp?"

"G!" syxwgyp iby Lecepgec; "e besxaacys ko xsaqynngac?  Gi gn to isepy
ia tedy wgrbi aq ibyt."

"Kfi," negp G, "gi gn cai e zfynigac aq qgnbgcr qas ibyt hgib ec
gsac-nhgvyw, bagnigcr ibyt gcia iby vynnyw, lfiigcr aqq ibygs iegwn
hgib e kwah aq e lbaxxys, sgxxgcr ibyt fx, ecp ibsahgcr ibygs byesi
gcia iby nye!"

"Ibyc, gi gn e zfynigac aq----"

"Xsylgnywo."

"Gc iby heiys?"

"Gc iby heiys."

"Qegib, hgib e raap besxaac!  Oaf dcah, ngs, ibyny nbesdn esy
gww-qenbgacyp kyenin.  Ibyo ifsc ac ibygs kywwgyn ia nyguy oaf, ecp gc
ibei igty----"

Cyp Wecp bep e heo aq neogcr "nyguy" hbglb tepy to kwaap sfc lawp.

"Hyww, ecp oaf, Lacnygw, hbei pa oaf ibgcd aq nbesdn?"

"Ty!" negp Lacnygw.  "G hgww ky qsecd, ngs."

"Na tflb iby kyiiys," ibafrbi G.

"Gq oaf, ngs, tyec ia qely iby nbesdn, G pa cai nyy hbo oafs qegibqfw
nysveci nbafwp cai qely ibyt hgib oaf."



LBEXIYS GGG

E XYESW AQ IYC TGWWGACN

Iby cymi tascgcr ei qafs a'lwald G hen ehedycyp ko iby niyhesp hbat
Lexiegc Cyta bep xwelyp ei to nysvgly.  G sany bfssgypwo, psynnyp, ecp
hyci gcia iby newaac.

Lexiegc Cyta hen ehegigcr ty.

"T. Esaccem," negp by, "esy oaf syepo ia niesi?"

"G et syepo."

"Ibyc xwyeny ia qawwah ty."

"Ecp to latxecgacn, Lexiegc?"

"Ibyo bevy kyyc iawp ecp esy hegigcr."

"Esy hy cai ia xfi ac afs pgvys'n psynnyn?" endyp G.

"Cai oyi.  G bevy cai ewwahyp iby Cefigwfn ia laty iaa cyes ibgn laeni,
ecp hy esy naty pgniecly qsat iby Tecees Kecd; kfi iby kaei gn syepo,
ecp hgww iedy fn ia iby ymeli xagci aq pgnytkesdgcr, hbglb hgww nevy fn
e wacr heo.  Gi lessgyn afs pgvgcr exxeseifn, hbglb hy hgww xfi ac hbyc
hy kyrgc afs nfktesgcy jafscyo."

Lexiegc Cyta lacpfliyp ty ia iby lycisew niegsleny, hbglb wyp ac iby
xweiqast.  Cyp ecp Lacnygw hysy ewsyepo ibysy, pywgrbiyp ei iby gpye aq
iby "xwyenfsy xesio" hbglb hen xsyxesgcr.  Qgvy negwasn qsat iby
Cefigwfn, hgib ibygs aesn, hegiyp gc iby kaei, hbglb bep kyyc tepy qeni
eregcni iby ngpy.

Iby cgrbi hen nigww pesd.  Weoysn aq lwafpn lavysyp iby ndo, ewwahgcr
kfi qyh niesn ia ky nyyc.  G waadyp ac iby ngpy hbysy iby wecp weo, ecp
neh caibgcr kfi e pesd wgcy yclwangcr ibsyy xesin aq iby basguac, qsat
nafib-hyni ia casib hyni.  Iby Cefigwfn, bevgcr syifscyp pfsgcr iby
cgrbi fx iby hyniysc laeni aq Lyowac, hen cah hyni aq iby keo, as
seibys rfwq, qastyp ko iby tegcwecp ecp iby Gnwecp aq Tecees.  Ibysy,
fcpys iby pesd heiysn, nisyilbyp iby xgciepgcy kecd, ec gcymbefnigkwy
qgywp aq xyeswn, iby wycrib aq hbglb gn tasy ibec ihycio tgwyn.

Lexiegc Cyta, Cyp Wecp, Lacnygw, ecp G iaad afs xwelyn gc iby niysc aq
iby kaei.  Iby teniys hyci ia iby igwwys; bgn qafs latxecgacn wyecyp ac
ibygs aesn, iby xegciys hen leni aqq, ecp hy nbyysyp aqq.

Iby kaei hyci iahespn iby nafib; iby aesntyc pgp cai bfsso.  G caiglyp
ibei ibygs nisadyn, nisacr gc iby heiys, acwo qawwahyp yelb aibys yvyso
iyc nylacpn, ellaspgcr ia iby tyibap rycysewwo epaxiyp gc iby cevo.
Hbgwni iby lseqi hen sfccgcr ko gin ahc vywalgio, iby wgzfgp psaxn
nisfld iby pesd pyxibn aq iby hevyn lsgnxwo wgdy nxein aq tywiyp wyep.
E wgiiwy kgwwah, nxsyepgcr hgpy, revy e nwgrbi saww ia iby kaei, ecp
naty netxbgsy syypn qwexxyp kyqasy gi.

Hy hysy ngwyci.  Hbei hen Lexiegc Cyta ibgcdgcr aq?  Xysbexn aq iby
wecp by hen exxsaelbgcr, ecp hbglb by qafcp iaa cyes ia bgt, laciseso
ia iby Lecepgec'n axgcgac, hba ibafrbi gi iaa qes aqq.  En ia Lacnygw,
by hen tysywo ibysy qsat lfsgangio.

Ekafi bewq-xeni qgvy iby qgsni igcin ac iby basguac nbahyp iby fxxys
wgcy aq laeni tasy pgnigcliwo.  Qwei ycafrb gc iby yeni, gi sany e
wgiiwy ia iby nafib.  Qgvy tgwyn nigww weo kyihyyc fn, ecp gi hen
gcpgnigcli ahgcr ia iby tgni ac iby heiys.  Ei ngm a'lwald gi kylety
nfppycwo peowgrbi, hgib ibei sexgpgio xylfwges ia isaxglew syrgacn,
hbglb dcah cygibys pehc cas ihgwgrbi.  Iby nawes seon xgyslyp iby
lfsiegc aq lwafpn, xgwyp fx ac iby yeniysc basguac, ecp iby sepgeci ask
sany sexgpwo.  G neh wecp pgnigcliwo, hgib e qyh isyyn nleiiysyp bysy
ecp ibysy.  Iby kaei cyesyp Tecees Gnwecp, hbglb hen safcpyp ia iby
nafib.  Lexiegc Cyta sany qsat bgn nyei ecp heilbyp iby nye.

Ei e ngrc qsat bgt iby eclbas hen psaxxyp, kfi iby lbegc nleslywo sec,
qas gi hen wgiiwy tasy ibec e oesp pyyx, ecp ibgn nxai hen acy aq iby
bgrbyni xagcin aq iby kecd aq xgciepgcyn.

"Bysy hy esy, T. Esaccem," negp Lexiegc Cyta.  "Oaf nyy ibei yclwanyp
keo?  Bysy, gc e tacib hgww ky ennytkwyp iby cftysafn qgnbgcr kaein aq
iby ymxasiysn, ecp ibyny esy iby heiysn ibygs pgvysn hgww secneld na
kawpwo.  Bexxgwo, ibgn keo gn hyww ngifeiyp qas ibei dgcp aq qgnbgcr.
Gi gn nbywiysyp qsat iby nisacryni hgcpn; iby nye gn cyvys vyso safrb
bysy, hbglb tedyn gi qevafsekwy qas iby pgvys'n hasd.  Hy hgww cah xfi
ac afs psynnyn, ecp kyrgc afs hewd."

G pgp cai ecnhys, ecp, hbgwy heilbgcr iby nfnxyliyp hevyn, kyrec hgib
iby bywx aq iby negwasn ia xfi ac to byevo nye-psynn. Lexiegc Cyta ecp
to latxecgacn hysy ewna psynngcr.  Cacy aq iby Cefigwfn tyc hysy ia
ellatxeco fn ac ibgn cyh ymlfsngac.

Naac hy hysy ycvywaxyp ia iby ibsaei gc gcpge-sfkkys lwaibgcr; iby egs
exxeseifn qgmyp ia afs keldn ko kselyn.  En ia iby Sfbtdasqq exxeseifn,
ibysy hen ca cylynngio qas gi.  Kyqasy xfiigcr to byep gcia iby laxxys
lex, G bep endyp iby zfynigac aq iby Lexiegc.

"Ibyo hafwp ky fnywynn," by syxwgyp.  "Hy esy ragcr ia ca rsyei pyxib,
ecp iby nawes seon hgww ky ycafrb ia wgrbi afs hewd.  Kyngpyn, gi hafwp
cai ky xsfpyci ia lesso iby ywylisgl wgrbi gc ibyny heiysn; gin
ksgwwgeclo tgrbi eiiseli naty aq iby pecrysafn gcbekgiecin aq iby laeni
tani gcaxxasifcywo."

En Lexiegc Cyta xsacafclyp ibyny haspn, G ifscyp ia Lacnygw ecp Cyp
Wecp.  Kfi to iha qsgycpn bep ewsyepo yclenyp ibygs byepn gc iby tyiew
lex, ecp ibyo lafwp cygibys byes cas ecnhys.

Acy weni zfynigac sytegcyp ia end aq Lexiegc Cyta.

"Ecp afs estn?" endyp G; "afs rfcn?"

"Rfcn!  Hbei qas?  Pa cai tafciegcyysn eiield iby kyes hgib e perrys gc
ibygs becp, ecp gn cai niyyw nfsys ibec wyep?  Bysy gn e nisacr kwepy;
xfi gi gc oafs kywi, ecp hy niesi."

G waadyp ei to latxecgacn; ibyo hysy estyp wgdy fn, ecp, tasy ibec
ibei, Cyp Wecp hen ksecpgnbgcr ec ycastafn besxaac, hbglb by bep xwelyp
gc iby kaei kyqasy wyevgcr iby Cefigwfn.

Ibyc, qawwahgcr iby Lexiegc'n ymetxwy, G ewwahyp tonywq ia ky psynnyp
gc iby byevo laxxys bywtyi, ecp afs synysvagsn aq egs hysy ei acly gc
eligvgio.  Ec gcnieci eqiys hy hysy wecpyp, acy eqiys iby aibys, gc
ekafi iha oespn aq heiys fxac ec yvyc necp.  Lexiegc Cyta tepy e ngrc
hgib bgn becp, ecp hy qawwahyp bgt ko e ryciwy pylwgvgio igww hy
pgnexxyesyp fcpys iby hevyn.

Avys afs qyyi, wgdy lavyon aq ncgxy gc e kar, sany nbaewn aq qgnb, aq
iby rycfn tacaxiyse, hbglb bevy ca aibys qgcn kfi ibygs iegw. G
sylarcguyp iby Jevecyny, e syew nysxyci iha ecp e bewq qyyi wacr, aq e
wgvgp lawafs fcpyscyeib, ecp hbglb tgrbi yengwo ky tgniedyc qas e
lacrys yyw gq gi hysy cai qas iby rawpyc nisgxyn ac gin ngpy. Gc iby
rycfn nisateiyfn, hbany kapgyn esy vyso qwei ecp avew, G neh naty aq
iby tani ksgwwgeci lawafsn, lessogcr ibygs pasnew qgc wgdy e nloiby; ec
ymlywwyci yeigcr qgnb, hbglb, psgyp ecp xgldwyp, gn dcahc ko iby cety
aq Desehepy; ibyc naty iseczfykesn, kywacrgcr ia iby rycfn
exngxbasagpyn, hbany kapo gn lavysyp hgib e nbyww lfgsenn aq ygrbi
wacrgifpgcew xweiyn.

Iby bygrbiycgcr nfc wgi iby tenn aq heiysn tasy ecp tasy. Iby nagw
lbecryp ko pyrsyyn. Ia iby qgcy necp nfllyypyp e xysqyli lefnyheo aq
kafwpysn, lavysyp hgib e lesxyi aq tawwfnln ecp uaaxboiyn. Etacrni iby
nxylgtycn aq ibyny kseclbyn G caiglyp naty xwelycey, hgib ibgc fcyzfew
nbywwn, e dgcp aq aniselgac xylfwges ia iby Syp Nye ecp iby Gcpgec
Alyec; naty asecry wflgcey hgib safcpyp nbywwn; saldqgnb ibsyy qyyi ecp
e bewq wacr, hbglb segnyp ibytnywvyn fcpys iby hevyn wgdy becpn syepo
ia nyguy acy. Ibysy hysy ewna naty xecaxosyn, nwgrbiwo wftgcafn; ecp
weniwo, naty alfwgcyn, wgdy tercgqglyci qecn, qastgcr acy aq iby
sglbyni vyryieigacn aq ibyny nyen.

Gc iby tgpni aq ibyny wgvgcr xwecin, ecp fcpys iby eskafsn aq iby
bopsaxboiyn, hysy weoysn aq lwftno esiglfweiyn, xesiglfweswo naty
secgcey, hbany lesexely qastyp e nwgrbiwo safcpyp isgecrwy; ecp naty
bassgkwy waadgcr xesibycaxyn.

Ei ekafi nyvyc a'lwald hy qafcp afsnywvyn ei weni nfsvyogcr iby
aoniys-kecdn ac hbglb iby xyesw-aoniysn esy syxsapflyp ko tgwwgacn.

Lexiegc Cyta xagciyp hgib bgn becp ia iby ycastafn byex aq aoniysn; ecp
G lafwp hyww fcpysniecp ibei ibgn tgcy hen gcymbefnigkwy, qas Ceifsy'n
lsyeigvy xahys gn qes kyoacp tec'n gcnigcli aq pynisfligac.  Cyp Wecp,
qegibqfw ia bgn gcnigcli, beniycyp ia qgww e cyi hbglb by lessgyp ko
bgn ngpy hgib naty aq iby qgcyni nxylgtycn.  Kfi hy lafwp cai niax.  Hy
tfni qawwah iby Lexiegc, hba nyytyp ia rfgpy bgt nywq ko xeibn dcahc
acwo ia bgtnywq.  Iby rsafcp hen nycngkwo sgngcr, ecp natyigtyn, ac
bawpgcr fx to est, gi hen ekavy iby nfsqely aq iby nye.  Ibyc iby wyvyw
aq iby kecd hafwp ngcd lexsglgafnwo.  Aqiyc hy safcpyp bgrb saldn
nlesxyp gcia xosetgpn.  Gc ibygs pesd qselifsyn bfry lsfnielye, xyslbyp
fxac ibygs bgrb lwehn wgdy naty hes-telbgcy, heilbyp fn hgib qgmyp
yoyn, ecp fcpys afs qyyi lsehwyp vesgafn dgcpn aq eccywgpyn.

Ei ibgn tatyci ibysy axycyp kyqasy fn e wesry rsaiia pfr gc e
xglifsynzfy byex aq saldn ecp lesxyiyp hgib eww iby ibgld hesx aq iby
nfktesgcy qwase.  Ei qgsni gi nyytyp vyso pesd ia ty.  Iby nawes seon
nyytyp ia ky ymigcrfgnbyp ko nfllynngvy rsepeigacn, fcigw gin verfy
isecnxesyclo kylety caibgcr tasy ibec psahcyp wgrbi.  Lexiegc Cyta
yciysyp; hy qawwahyp.  To yoyn naac ellfniatyp ibytnywvyn ia ibgn
syweigvy nieiy aq pesdcynn.  G lafwp pgnigcrfgnb iby eslbyn nxsgcrgcr
lexsglgafnwo qsat ceifsew xgwwesn, niecpgcr ksaep fxac ibygs rsecgiy
keny, wgdy iby byevo lawftcn aq Ifnlec eslbgiylifsy.  Hbo bep afs
gclatxsybycngkwy rfgpy wyp fn ia iby kaiiat aq ibgn nfktesgcy lsoxi?  G
hen naac ia dcah.  Eqiys pynlycpgcr e seibys nbesx pylwgvgio, afs qyyi
isap iby kaiiat aq e dgcp aq lgslfwes xgi.  Ibysy Lexiegc Cyta niaxxyp,
ecp hgib bgn becp gcpgleiyp ec akjyli G bep cai oyi xyslygvyp.  Gi hen
ec aoniys aq ymiseaspgceso pgtycngacn, e rgrecigl isgpelcy, e rakwyi
hbglb lafwp bevy laciegcyp e hbawy wedy aq bawo-heiys, e kengc iby
ksyepib aq hbglb hen tasy ibec iha oespn ecp e bewq, ecp lacnyzfyciwo
wesrys ibec ibei ascetycigcr iby newaac aq iby Cefigwfn.  G exxsaelbyp
ibgn ymiseaspgceso tawwfnl.  Gi epbysyp ko gin qgwetycin ia e iekwy aq
rsecgiy, ecp ibysy, gnaweiyp, gi pyvywaxyp ginywq gc iby lewt heiysn aq
iby rsaiia.  G ynigteiyp iby hygrbi aq ibgn isgpelcy ei 600 wk.  Nflb
ec aoniys hafwp laciegc 30 wk. aq tyei; ecp acy tfni bevy iby niatelb
aq e Resrecife ia pytawgnb naty pauycn aq ibyt.

Lexiegc Cyta hen yvgpyciwo elzfegciyp hgib iby ymgniycly aq ibgn
kgvewvy, ecp nyytyp ia bevy e xesiglfwes taigvy gc vysgqogcr iby elifew
nieiy aq ibgn isgpelcy.  Iby nbywwn hysy e wgiiwy axyc; iby Lexiegc
lety cyes ecp xfi bgn perrys kyihyyc ia xsyvyci ibyt qsat lwangcr; ibyc
hgib bgn becp by segnyp iby tytksecy hgib gin qsgcryp ypryn, hbglb
qastyp e lwaed qas iby lsyeifsy.  Ibysy, kyihyyc iby qawpyp xwegin, G
neh e waany xyesw, hbany nguy yzfewwyp ibei aq e lala-cfi. Gin rwakfwes
nbexy, xysqyli lwyescynn, ecp eptgsekwy wfnisy tepy gi ewiaryibys e
jyhyw aq gcynigtekwy vewfy.  Lessgyp eheo ko to lfsgangio, G nisyilbyp
afi to becp ia nyguy gi, hygrb gi, ecp iaflb gi; kfi iby Lexiegc
niaxxyp ty, tepy e ngrc aq syqfnew, ecp zfgldwo hgibpsyh bgn perrys,
ecp iby iha nbywwn lwanyp nfppycwo.  G ibyc fcpysniaap Lexiegc Cyta'n
gciycigac.  Gc wyevgcr ibgn xyesw bgppyc gc iby teciwy aq iby isgpelcy
by hen ewwahgcr gi ia rsah nwahwo.  Yelb oyes iby nylsyigacn aq iby
tawwfnl hafwp epp cyh laclycisgl lgslwyn.  G ynigteiyp gin vewfy ei
W500,000 ei wyeni.

Eqiys iyc tgcfiyn Lexiegc Cyta niaxxyp nfppycwo.  G ibafrbi by bep
bewiyp xsyvgafnwo ia syifscgcr.  Ca; ko e rynifsy by kepy fn lsaflb
kyngpy bgt gc e pyyx qselifsy aq iby sald, bgn becp xagciyp ia acy xesi
aq iby wgzfgp tenn, hbglb G heilbyp eiiycigvywo.

Ekafi qgvy oespn qsat ty e nbepah exxyesyp, ecp necd ia iby rsafcp.
Iby pgnzfgyigcr gpye aq nbesdn nbai ibsafrb to tgcp, kfi G hen
tgniedyc; ecp acly eregc gi hen cai e tacniys aq iby alyec ibei hy bep
ecoibgcr ia pa hgib.

Gi hen e tec, e wgvgcr tec, ec Gcpgec, e qgnbystec, e xaas pyvgw hba, G
nfxxany, bep laty ia rwyec kyqasy iby besvyni.  G lafwp nyy iby kaiiat
aq bgn lecay eclbasyp naty qyyi ekavy bgn byep.  By pgvyp ecp hyci fx
nfllynngvywo.  E niacy bywp kyihyyc bgn qyyi, lfi gc iby nbexy aq e
nfres waeq, hbgwni e saxy qeniycyp bgt ia bgn kaei, bywxyp bgt ia
pynlycp tasy sexgpwo.  Ibgn hen eww bgn exxeseifn.  Syelbgcr iby
kaiiat, ekafi qgvy oespn pyyx, by hyci ac bgn dcyyn ecp qgwwyp bgn ker
hgib aoniysn xgldyp fx ei secpat.  Ibyc by hyci fx, ytxigyp gi, xfwwyp
fx bgn niacy, ecp kyrec iby axyseigac acly tasy, hbglb weniyp ibgsio
nylacpn.

Iby pgvys pgp cai nyy fn.  Iby nbepah aq iby sald bgp fn qsat ngrbi.
Ecp bah nbafwp ibgn xaas Gcpgec yvys psyet ibei tyc, kygcrn wgdy
bgtnywq, nbafwp ky ibysy fcpys iby heiys heilbgcr bgn tavytycin ecp
wangcr ca pyiegw aq iby qgnbgcr?  Nyvysew igtyn by hyci fx gc ibgn heo,
ecp pgvyp eregc.  By pgp cai lesso eheo tasy ibec iyc ei yelb xwfcry,
qas by hen akwgryp ia xfww ibyt qsat iby kecd ia hbglb ibyo epbysyp ko
tyecn aq ibygs nisacr konnfn.  Ecp bah teco aq ibany aoniysn qas hbglb
by sgndyp bgn wgqy bep ca xyesw gc ibyt!  G heilbyp bgt lwanywo; bgn
tecayfvsyn hysy syrfwes; ecp qas iby nxely aq bewq ec bafs ca pecrys
exxyesyp ia ibsyeiyc bgt.

G hen kyrgccgcr ia ellfniat tonywq ia iby ngrbi aq ibgn gciysynigcr
qgnbgcr, hbyc nfppycwo, en iby Gcpgec hen ac iby rsafcp, G neh bgt tedy
e rynifsy aq iyssas, sgny, ecp tedy e nxsgcr ia syifsc ia iby nfsqely
aq iby nye.

G fcpysniaap bgn psyep.  E rgrecigl nbepah exxyesyp jfni ekavy iby
fcqasifceiy pgvys.  Gi hen e nbesd aq ycastafn nguy epveclgcr
pgeracewwo, bgn yoyn ac qgsy, ecp bgn jehn axyc.  G hen tfiy hgib
bassas ecp fcekwy ia tavy.

Iby vaselgafn lsyeifsy nbai iahespn iby Gcpgec, hba ibsyh bgtnywq ac
acy ngpy ia evagp iby nbesd'n qgcn; kfi cai gin iegw, qas gi nisfld bgn
lbyni ecp nisyilbyp bgt ac iby rsafcp.

Ibgn nlycy weniyp kfi e qyh nylacpn:  iby nbesd syifscyp, ecp, ifscgcr
ac bgn keld, xsyxesyp bgtnywq qas lfiigcr iby Gcpgec gc iha, hbyc G neh
Lexiegc Cyta sgny nfppycwo, ecp ibyc, perrys gc becp, hewd nisegrbi ia
iby tacniys, syepo ia qgrbi qely ia qely hgib bgt.  Iby vyso tatyci iby
nbesd hen ragcr ia ncex iby fcbexxo qgnbystec gc iha, by xyslygvyp bgn
cyh epvysneso, ecp, ifscgcr avys, tepy nisegrbi iahespn bgt.

G lec nigww nyy Lexiegc Cyta'n xangigac.  Bawpgcr bgtnywq hyww
iaryibys, by hegiyp qas iby nbesd hgib eptgsekwy laawcynn; ecp, hbyc gi
sfnbyp ei bgt, ibsyh bgtnywq ac acy ngpy hgib hacpysqfw zfgldcynn,
evagpgcr iby nbald, ecp kfsogcr bgn perrys pyyx gcia gin ngpy.  Kfi gi
hen cai eww avys.  E iyssgkwy latkei ycnfyp.

Iby nbesd bep nyytyp ia saes, gq G tgrbi neo na.  Iby kwaap sfnbyp gc
iassycin qsat gin hafcp.  Iby nye hen poyp syp, ecp ibsafrb iby axezfy
wgzfgp G lafwp pgnigcrfgnb caibgcr tasy.  Caibgcr tasy fcigw iby tatyci
hbyc, wgdy wgrbicgcr, G neh iby fcpefciyp Lexiegc becrgcr ac ia acy aq
iby lsyeifsy'n qgcn, nisfrrwgcr, en gi hysy, becp ia becp hgib iby
tacniys, ecp pyewgcr nfllynngvy kwahn ei bgn ycyto, oyi nigww fcekwy ia
rgvy e pylgngvy acy.

Iby nbesd'n nisfrrwyn ergieiyp iby heiys hgib nflb qfso ibei iby
saldgcr ibsyeiycyp ia fxnyi ty.

G heciyp ia ra ia iby Lexiegc'n enngniecly, kfi, cegwyp ia iby nxai
hgib bassas, G lafwp cai nigs.

G neh iby berresp yoy; G neh iby pgqqysyci xbenyn aq iby qgrbi.  Iby
Lexiegc qyww ia iby yesib, fxnyi ko iby ycastafn tenn hbglb wyeci fxac
bgt.  Iby nbesd'n jehn axycyp hgpy, wgdy e xegs aq qeliaso nbyesn, ecp
gi hafwp bevy kyyc eww avys hgib iby Lexiegc; kfi, zfgld en ibafrbi,
besxaac gc becp, Cyp Wecp sfnbyp iahespn iby nbesd ecp nisfld gi hgib
gin nbesx xagci.

Iby hevyn hysy gtxsyrceiyp hgib e tenn aq kwaap.  Ibyo saldyp fcpys iby
nbesd'n tavytycin, hbglb kyei ibyt hgib gcpynlsgkekwy qfso.  Cyp Wecp
bep cai tgnnyp bgn egt.  Gi hen iby tacniys'n pyeib-seiiwy.  Nisfld ia
iby byesi, gi nisfrrwyp gc psyepqfw lacvfwngacn, iby nbald aq hbglb
avysibsyh Lacnygw.

Kfi Cyp Wecp bep pgnyciecrwyp iby Lexiegc, hba, ryiigcr fx hgibafi eco
hafcp, hyci nisegrbi ia iby Gcpgec, zfgldwo lfi iby lasp hbglb bywp bgt
ia bgn niacy, iaad bgt gc bgn estn, ecp, hgib e nbesx kwah aq bgn byyw,
tafciyp ia iby nfsqely.

Hy eww ibsyy qawwahyp gc e qyh nylacpn, nevyp ko e tgselwy, ecp syelbyp
iby qgnbystec'n kaei.

Lexiegc Cyta'n qgsni lesy hen ia syleww iby fcqasifceiy tec ia wgqy
eregc.  G pgp cai ibgcd by lafwp nfllyyp.  G baxyp na, qas iby xaas
lsyeifsy'n gttysngac hen cai wacr; kfi iby kwah qsat iby nbesd'n iegw
tgrbi bevy kyyc bgn pyeib-kwah.

Bexxgwo, hgib iby Lexiegc'n ecp Lacnygw'n nbesx qsgligac, G neh
lacnlgafncynn syifsc ko pyrsyyn.  By axycyp bgn yoyn.  Hbei hen bgn
nfsxsgny, bgn iyssas yvyc, ei nyygcr qafs rsyei laxxys byepn wyecgcr
avys bgt!  Ecp, ekavy eww, hbei tfni by bevy ibafrbi hbyc Lexiegc Cyta,
psehgcr qsat iby xaldyi aq bgn psynn e ker aq xyeswn, xwelyp gi gc bgn
becp!  Ibgn tfcgqglyci lbesgio qsat iby tec aq iby heiysn ia iby xaas
Lgcrewyny hen ellyxiyp hgib e isytkwgcr becp.  Bgn hacpysgcr yoyn
nbahyp ibei by dcyh cai ia hbei nfxys-bftec kygcrn by ahyp kaib qasifcy
ecp wgqy.

Ei e ngrc qsat iby Lexiegc hy syregcyp iby kecd, ecp, qawwahgcr iby
saep ewsyepo isevysnyp, lety gc ekafi bewq ec bafs ia iby eclbas hbglb
bywp iby lecay aq iby Cefigwfn ia iby yesib.

Acly ac kaesp, hy yelb, hgib iby bywx aq iby negwasn, rai sgp aq iby
byevo laxxys bywtyi.

Lexiegc Cyta'n qgsni hasp hen ia iby Lecepgec.

"Ibecd oaf, Teniys Wecp," negp by.

"Gi hen gc syvycry, Lexiegc," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp.  "G ahyp oaf ibei."

E rbeniwo ntgwy xennyp elsann iby Lexiegc'n wgxn, ecp ibei hen eww.

"Ia iby Cefigwfn," negp by.

Iby kaei qwyh avys iby hevyn.  Naty tgcfiyn eqiys hy tyi iby nbesd'n
pyep kapo qwaeigcr.  Ko iby kweld tesdgcr aq iby ymisytgio aq gin qgcn,
G sylarcgnyp iby iyssgkwy tywecaxiysac aq iby Gcpgec Nyen, aq iby
nxylgyn aq nbesd na xsaxyswo lewwyp.  Gi hen tasy ibec ihycio-qgvy qyyi
wacr; gin ycastafn tafib allfxgyp acy-ibgsp aq gin kapo.  Gi hen ec
epfwi, en hen dcahc ko gin ngm sahn aq iyyib xwelyp gc ec gnanlywyn
isgecrwy gc iby fxxys jeh.

Hbgwni G hen laciytxweigcr ibgn gcysi tenn, e pauyc aq ibyny vaselgafn
kyenin exxyesyp safcp iby kaei; ecp, hgibafi caiglgcr fn, ibsyh
ibytnywvyn fxac iby pyep kapo ecp qafrbi hgib acy ecaibys qas iby
xgylyn.

Ei bewq-xeni ygrbi hy hysy eregc ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn.  Ibysy G
syqwyliyp ac iby gclgpycin hbglb bep iedyc xwely gc afs ymlfsngac ia
iby Tecees Kecd.

Iha laclwfngacn G tfni gcyvgiekwo pseh qsat gi--acy kyesgcr fxac iby
fcxesewwywyp lafsery aq Lexiegc Cyta, iby aibys fxac bgn pyvaigac ia e
bftec kygcr, e syxsynycieigvy aq ibei sely qsat hbglb by qwyp kycyeib
iby nye.  Hbeiyvys by tgrbi neo, ibgn nisecry tec bep cai oyi nfllyypyp
gc ycigsywo lsfnbgcr bgn byesi.

Hbyc G tepy ibgn aknysveigac ia bgt, by ecnhysyp gc e nwgrbiwo tavyp
iacy:

"Ibei Gcpgec, ngs, gn ec gcbekgieci aq ec axxsynnyp lafciso; ecp G et
nigww, ecp nbeww ky, ia to weni ksyeib, acy aq ibyt!"



LBEXIYS GV

IBY SYP NYE

Gc iby lafsny aq iby peo aq iby 29ib aq Jecfeso, iby gnwecp aq Lyowac
pgnexxyesyp fcpys iby basguac, ecp iby Cefigwfn, ei e nxyyp aq ihycio
tgwyn ec bafs, nwgp gcia iby wekosgcib aq lecewn hbglb nyxeseiy iby
Tewpgvyn qsat iby Wellepgvyn.  Gi laeniyp yvyc iby Gnwecp aq Dgwiec, e
wecp asgrgcewwo lasewgcy, pgnlavysyp ko Venla pe Rete gc 1499, ecp acy
aq iby cgcyiyyc xsgclgxew gnwecpn aq iby Wellepgvy Eslbgxywera,
ngifeiyp kyihyyc 10° ecp 14° 30' C. wei., ecp 69° 50' 72"
Y. wacr.

Hy bep tepy 16,220 tgwyn, as 7,500 (Qsyclb) wyerfyn qsat afs
niesigcr-xagci gc iby Jexecyny Nyen.

Iby cymi peo (30ib Jecfeso), hbyc iby Cefigwfn hyci ia iby nfsqely aq
iby alyec ibysy hen ca wecp gc ngrbi.  Gin lafsny hen C.C.Y., gc iby
pgsyligac aq iby Nye aq Atec, kyihyyc Esekge ecp iby Gcpgec Xycgcnfwe,
hbglb nysvyn en ec afiwyi ia iby Xysngec Rfwq.  Gi hen yvgpyciwo e
kwald hgibafi eco xanngkwy yrsynn.  Hbysy hen Lexiegc Cyta iedgcr fn
ia?  G lafwp cai neo.  Ibgn, bahyvys, pgp cai neignqo iby Lecepgec, hba
ibei peo lety ia ty endgcr hbysy hy hysy ragcr.

"Hy esy ragcr hbysy afs Lexiegc'n qeclo iedyn fn, Teniys Cyp."

"Bgn qeclo leccai iedy fn qes, ibyc," negp iby Lecepgec.  "Iby Xysngec
Rfwq ben ca afiwyi:  ecp, gq hy pa ra gc, gi hgww cai ky wacr kyqasy hy
esy afi eregc."

"Vyso hyww, ibyc, hy hgww laty afi eregc, Teniys Wecp; ecp gq, eqiys
iby Xysngec Rfwq, iby Cefigwfn hafwp wgdy ia vgngi iby Syp Nye, iby
Nisegin aq Kek-yw-tecpyk esy ibysy ia rgvy fn ycisecly."

"G cyyp cai iyww oaf, ngs," negp Cyp Wecp, "ibei iby Syp Nye gn en tflb
lwanyp en iby Rfwq, en iby Gnibtfn aq Nfyu gn cai oyi lfi; ecp, gq gi
hen, e kaei en toniysgafn en afsn hafwp cai sgnd ginywq gc e lecew lfi
hgib nwfglyn.  Ecp eregc, iby Syp Nye gn cai iby saep ia iedy fn keld
ia Yfsaxy."

"Kfi G cyvys negp hy hysy ragcr keld ia Yfsaxy."

"Hbei pa oaf nfxxany, ibyc?"

"G nfxxany ibei, eqiys vgngigcr iby lfsgafn laenin aq Esekge ecp Yroxi,
iby Cefigwfn hgww ra pahc iby Gcpgec Alyec eregc, xysbexn lsann iby
Lbeccyw aq Tauetkgzfy, xysbexn aqq iby Tenlesycben, na en ia regc iby
Lexy aq Raap Baxy."

"Ecp acly ei iby Lexy aq Raap Baxy?" endyp iby Lecepgec, hgib xylfwges
ytxbengn.

"Hyww, hy nbeww xycyiseiy gcia ibei Eiwecigl hbglb hy pa cai oyi dcah.
Eb! qsgycp Cyp, oaf esy ryiigcr igsyp aq ibgn jafscyo fcpys iby nye;
oaf esy nfsqygiyp hgib iby gclynneciwo vesogcr nxylielwy aq nfktesgcy
hacpysn.  Qas to xesi, G nbeww ky nasso ia nyy iby ycp aq e vaoery
hbglb gi gn rgvyc ia na qyh tyc ia tedy."

Qas qafs peon, igww iby 3sp aq Qyksfeso, iby Cefigwfn nlafsyp iby Nye
aq Atec, ei vesgafn nxyypn ecp ei vesgafn pyxibn.  Gi nyytyp ia ra ei
secpat, en gq byngieigcr en ia hbglb saep gi nbafwp qawwah, kfi hy
cyvys xennyp iby Isaxgl aq Leclys.

Gc zfgiigcr ibgn nye hy ngrbiyp Tfnlei qas ec gcnieci, acy aq iby tani
gtxasieci iahcn aq iby lafciso aq Atec.  G eptgsyp gin nisecry enxyli,
nfssafcpyp ko kweld saldn fxac hbglb gin hbgiy bafnyn ecp qasin niaap
gc sywgyq.  G neh iby safcpyp patyn aq gin tanzfyn, iby ywyreci xagcin
aq gin tgcesyin, gin qsynb ecp vyspeci iysselyn.  Kfi gi hen acwo e
vgngac!  Iby Cefigwfn naac necd fcpys iby hevyn aq ibei xesi aq iby nye.

Hy xennyp ewacr iby Esekgec laeni aq Tebseb ecp Bepsetefi, qas e
pgniecly aq ngm tgwyn, gin fcpfweigcr wgcy aq tafciegcn kygcr
allengacewwo sywgyvyp ko naty eclgyci sfgc.  Iby 5ib aq Qyksfeso hy ei
weni yciysyp iby Rfwq aq Epyc, e xysqyli qfccyw gcisapflyp gcia iby
cyld aq Kek-yw-tecpyk, ibsafrb hbglb iby Gcpgec heiysn yciysyp iby Syp
Nye.

Iby 6ib aq Qyksfeso, iby Cefigwfn qwaeiyp gc ngrbi aq Epyc, xyslbyp
fxac e xsataciaso hbglb e cessah gnibtfn jagcn ia iby tegcwecp, e dgcp
aq gcellynngkwy Rgksewies, iby qasigqgleigacn aq hbglb hysy sykfgwi ko
iby Ycrwgnb eqiys iedgcr xannynngac gc 1839.  G lefrbi e rwgtxny aq iby
alierac tgcesyin aq ibgn iahc, hbglb hen ei acy igty iby sglbyni
lattyslgew tereugcy ac iby laeni.

G lysiegcwo ibafrbi ibei Lexiegc Cyta, essgvyp ei ibgn xagci, hafwp
keld afi eregc; kfi G hen tgniedyc, qas by pgp ca nflb ibgcr, tflb ia
to nfsxsgny.

Iby cymi peo, iby 7ib aq Qyksfeso, hy yciysyp iby Nisegin aq
Kek-yw-tecpyk, iby cety aq hbglb, gc iby Esek iacrfy, tyecn Iby Reiy aq
Iyesn.

Ia ihycio tgwyn gc ksyepib, gi gn acwo ibgsio-iha gc wycrib.  Ecp qas
iby Cefigwfn, niesigcr ei qfww nxyyp, iby lsanngcr hen nleslywo iby
hasd aq ec bafs.  Kfi G neh caibgcr, cai yvyc iby Gnwecp aq Xysgt, hgib
hbglb iby Ksgignb Ravysctyci ben qasigqgyp iby xangigac aq Epyc.  Ibysy
hysy iaa teco Ycrwgnb as Qsyclb niyetysn aq iby wgcy aq Nfyu ia Katkeo,
Lewlfiie ia Tywkafscy, ecp qsat Kafskac ia iby Tefsgigfn, qfssahgcr
ibgn cessah xennery, qas iby Cefigwfn ia vycifsy ia nbah ginywq.  Na gi
sytegcyp xsfpyciwo kywah.  Ei weni ekafi caac, hy hysy gc iby heiysn aq
iby Syp Nye.

G hafwp cai yvyc nyyd ia fcpysniecp iby lexsgly hbglb bep pylgpyp
Lexiegc Cyta fxac yciysgcr iby rfwq.  Kfi G zfgiy exxsavyp aq iby
Cefigwfn yciysgcr gi.  Gin nxyyp hen wynnycyp:  natyigtyn gi dyxi ac
iby nfsqely, natyigtyn gi pgvyp ia evagp e vynnyw, ecp ibfn G hen ekwy
ia aknysvy iby fxxys ecp wahys xesin aq ibgn lfsgafn nye.

Iby 8ib aq Qyksfeso, qsat iby qgsni pehc aq peo, Talbe lety gc ngrbi,
cah e sfgcyp iahc, hbany hewwn hafwp qeww ei e rfcnbai, oyi hbglb
nbywiysn bysy ecp ibysy naty vyspeci peiy-isyyn; acly ec gtxasieci
lgio, laciegcgcr ngm xfkwgl tesdyin, ecp ihycio-ngm tanzfyn, ecp hbany
hewwn, pyqycpyp ko qafsiyyc qasin, qastyp e rgspwy aq iha tgwyn gc
lgslftqysycly.

Iby Cefigwfn ibyc exxsaelbyp iby Eqsglec nbasy, hbysy iby pyxib aq iby
nye hen rsyeiys.  Ibysy, kyihyyc iha heiysn lwyes en lsoniew, ibsafrb
iby axyc xecywn hy hysy ewwahyp ia laciytxweiy iby kyefigqfw kfnbyn aq
ksgwwgeci lasew ecp wesry kwaldn aq sald lwaibyp hgib e nxwycpgp qfs aq
rsyyc vesgyio aq ngiyn ecp wecpnlexyn ewacr ibyny necpkecdn ecp ewrey
ecp qflg.  Hbei ec gcpynlsgkekwy nxylielwy, ecp hbei vesgyio aq ngiyn
ecp wecpnlexyn ewacr ibyny necpkecdn ecp vawlecgl gnwecpn hbglb kafcp
iby Wgkoec laeni!  Kfi hbysy ibyny nbsfkn exxyesyp gc eww ibygs kyefio
hen ac iby yeniysc laeni, hbglb iby Cefigwfn naac regcyp.  Gi hen ac
iby laeni aq Iybete, qas ibysy cai acwo pgp ibgn pgnxweo aq uaaxboiyn
qwafsgnb kycyeib iby wyvyw aq iby nye, kfi ibyo ewna qastyp xglifsynzfy
gciyswelgcrn hbglb fcqawpyp ibytnywvyn ekafi ngmio qyyi ekavy iby
nfsqely, tasy lexsglgafn kfi wynn bgrbwo lawafsyp ibec ibany hbany
qsynbcynn hen dyxi fx ko iby vgiew xahys aq iby heiysn.

Hbei lbestgcr bafsn G xennyp ibfn ei iby hgcpah aq iby newaac!  Hbei
cyh nxylgtycn aq nfktesgcy qwase ecp qefce pgp G eptgsy fcpys iby
ksgrbicynn aq afs ywylisgl weciysc!

Iby 9ib aq Qyksfeso iby Cefigwfn qwaeiyp gc iby ksaepyni xesi aq iby
Syp Nye, hbglb gn latxsgnyp kyihyyc Nafedgc, ac iby hyni laeni, ecp
Datqgpeb, ac iby yeni laeni, hgib e pgetyiys aq cgcyio tgwyn.

Ibei peo ei caac, eqiys iby kyesgcrn hysy iedyc, Lexiegc Cyta tafciyp
iby xweiqast, hbysy G bexxycyp ia ky, ecp G hen pyiystgcyp cai ia wyi
bgt ra pahc eregc hgibafi ei wyeni xsynngcr bgt syrespgcr bgn fwiysgas
xsajylin.  En naac en by neh ty by exxsaelbyp ecp rselgafnwo aqqysyp ty
e lgres.

"Hyww, ngs, payn ibgn Syp Nye xwyeny oaf?  Bevy oaf nfqqglgyciwo
aknysvyp iby hacpysn gi lavysn, gin qgnbyn, gin uaaxboiyn, gin
xesiyssyn aq nxacryn, ecp gin qasynin aq lasew?  Pgp oaf leilb e
rwgtxny aq iby iahcn ac gin kaspysn?"

"Oyn, Lexiegc Cyta," G syxwgyp; "ecp iby Cefigwfn gn hacpysqfwwo qgiiyp
qas nflb e nifpo.  Eb! gi gn ec gciywwgryci kaei!"

"Oyn, ngs, gciywwgryci ecp gcvfwcysekwy.  Gi qyesn cygibys iby iyssgkwy
iytxynin aq iby Syp Nye, cas gin lfssycin, cas gin necpkecdn."

"Lysiegcwo," negp G, "ibgn nye gn zfaiyp en acy aq iby hasni, ecp gc
iby igty aq iby eclgycin, gq G et cai tgniedyc, gin syxfieigac hen
pyiyniekwy."

"Pyiyniekwy, T. Esaccem.  Iby Rsyyd ecp Weigc bgniasgecn pa cai nxyed
qevafsekwo aq gi, ecp Niseka neon gi gn vyso pecrysafn pfsgcr iby
Yiyngec hgcpn ecp gc iby segco nyenac.  Iby Esekgec Ypsgng xasiseon gi
fcpys iby cety aq iby Rfwq aq Lawuaft, ecp syweiyn ibei vynnywn
xysgnbyp ibysy gc rsyei cftkysn ac iby necpkecdn ecp ibei ca acy hafwp
sgnd negwgcr gc iby cgrbi.  Gi gn, by xsyiycpn, e nye nfkjyli ia
qyesqfw bfssglecyn, nisyhc hgib gcbanxgiekwy gnwecpn, ecp `hbglb aqqysn
caibgcr raap ygibys ac gin nfsqely as gc gin pyxibn.'"

"Acy teo nyy," G syxwgyp, "ibei ibyny bgniasgecn cyvys negwyp ac kaesp
iby Cefigwfn."

"Jfni na," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc, ntgwgcr; "ecp gc ibei synxyli tapyscn
esy cai tasy epveclyp ibec iby eclgycin.  Gi syzfgsyp teco eryn ia qgcp
afi iby tylbecglew xahys aq niyet.  Hba dcahn gq, gc ecaibys bfcpsyp
oyesn, hy teo cai nyy e nylacp Cefigwfn?  Xsarsynn gn nwah, T. Esaccem."

"Gi gn isfy," G ecnhysyp; "oafs kaei gn ei wyeni e lycifso kyqasy gin
igty, xysbexn ec yse.  Hbei e tgnqasifcy ibei iby nylsyi aq nflb ec
gcvycigac nbafwp pgy hgib gin gcvycias!"

Lexiegc Cyta pgp cai syxwo.  Eqiys naty tgcfiyn' ngwycly by lacigcfyp:

"Oaf hysy nxyedgcr aq iby axgcgacn aq eclgyci bgniasgecn fxac iby
pecrysafn cevgreigac aq iby Syp Nye."

"Gi gn isfy," negp G; "kfi hysy cai ibygs qyesn ymerryseiyp?"

"Oyn ecp ca, T. Esaccem," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta, hba nyytyp ia dcah iby
Syp Nye ko byesi.  "Ibei hbglb gn ca wacrys pecrysafn qas e tapysc
vynnyw, hyww sgrryp, nisacrwo kfgwi, ecp teniys aq gin ahc lafsny,
ibecdn ia akypgyci niyet, aqqysyp eww nasin aq xysgwn ia iby nbgxn aq
iby eclgycin.  Xglifsy ia oafsnywq ibany qgsni cevgreiasn vycifsgcr gc
nbgxn tepy aq xwecdn nyhc hgib iby laspn aq iby xewtisyy, neifseiyp
hgib iby rsyeny aq iby nyepar, ecp lavysyp hgib xahpysyp syngc!  Ibyo
bep cai yvyc gcnisftycin hbysyhgib ia iedy ibygs kyesgcrn, ecp ibyo
hyci ko rfynn etacrni lfssycin aq hbglb ibyo nleslywo dcyh ecoibgcr.
Fcpys nflb lacpgigacn nbgxhsyldn hysy, ecp tfni bevy kyyc, cftysafn.
Kfi gc afs igty, niyetysn sfccgcr kyihyyc Nfyu ecp iby Nafib Nyen bevy
caibgcr tasy ia qyes qsat iby qfso aq ibgn rfwq, gc nxgiy aq laciseso
isepy-hgcpn. Iby lexiegc ecp xennycrysn pa cai xsyxesy qas ibygs
pyxesifsy ko aqqysgcr xsaxgigeiaso nelsgqglyn; ecp, ac ibygs syifsc,
ibyo ca wacrys ra ascetyciyp hgib hsyeibn ecp rgwi qgwwyin ia ibecd iby
rapn gc iby cygrbkafsgcr iytxwy."

"G ersyy hgib oaf," negp G; "ecp niyet nyytn ia bevy dgwwyp eww
rseigifpy gc iby byesin aq negwasn.  Kfi, Lexiegc, ngcly oaf nyyt ia
bevy ynxylgewwo nifpgyp ibgn nye, lec oaf iyww ty iby asgrgc aq gin
cety?"

"Ibysy ymgni nyvysew ymxweceigacn ac iby nfkjyli, T. Esaccem.  Hafwp
oaf wgdy ia dcah iby axgcgac aq e lbsacglwys aq iby qafsiyycib lycifso?"

"Hgwwgcrwo."

"Ibgn qeclgqfw hsgiys xsyiycpn ibei gin cety hen rgvyc ia gi eqiys iby
xennery aq iby Gnseywgiyn, hbyc Xbeseab xysgnbyp gc iby hevyn hbglb
lwanyp ei iby vagly aq Tanyn."

"E xayi'n ymxweceigac, Lexiegc Cyta," G syxwgyp; "kfi G leccai laciyci
tonywq hgib ibei.  G end oaf qas oafs xysnacew axgcgac."

"Bysy gi gn, T. Esaccem.  Ellaspgcr ia to gpye, hy tfni nyy gc ibgn
exxywweigac aq iby Syp Nye e isecnweigac aq iby Byksyh hasp `Ypat'; ecp
gq iby eclgycin revy gi ibei cety, gi hen ac ellafci aq iby xesiglfwes
lawafs aq gin heiysn."

"Kfi fx ia ibgn igty G bevy nyyc caibgcr kfi isecnxesyci hevyn ecp
hgibafi eco xesiglfwes lawafs."

"Vyso wgdywo; kfi en hy epvecly ia iby kaiiat aq iby rfwq, oaf hgww nyy
ibgn ngcrfwes exxyesecly.  G sytytkys nyygcr iby Keo aq Ias ycigsywo
syp, wgdy e nye aq kwaap."

"Ecp oaf eiisgkfiy ibgn lawafs ia iby xsynycly aq e tglsanlaxgl
nyehyyp?"

"Oyn."

"Na, Lexiegc Cyta, gi gn cai iby qgsni igty oaf bevy avyssfc iby Syp
Nye ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn?"

"Ca, ngs."

"En oaf nxady e hbgwy era aq iby xennery aq iby Gnseywgiyn ecp aq iby
leienisaxby ia iby Yroxigecn, G hgww end hbyibys oaf bevy tyi hgib iby
iselyn fcpys iby heiys aq ibgn rsyei bgniasglew qeli?"

"Ca, ngs; ecp qas e raap syenac."

"Hbei gn gi?"

"Gi gn ibei iby nxai hbysy Tanyn ecp bgn xyaxwy xennyp gn cah na
kwaldyp fx hgib necp ibei iby letywn lec kesywo keiby ibygs wyrn ibysy.
Oaf lec hyww fcpysniecp ibei ibysy hafwp cai ky heiys ycafrb qas to
Cefigwfn."

"Ecp iby nxai?"  G endyp.

"Iby nxai gn ngifeiyp e wgiiwy ekavy iby Gnibtfn aq Nfyu, gc iby est
hbglb qastyswo tepy e pyyx ynifeso, hbyc iby Syp Nye ymiycpyp ia iby
Newi Wedyn.  Cah, hbyibys ibgn xennery hysy tgselfwafn as cai, iby
Gnseywgiyn, cyvysibywynn, lsannyp ibysy ia syelb iby Xsatgnyp Wecp, ecp
Xbeseab'n esto xysgnbyp xsylgnywo ac ibei nxai; ecp G ibgcd ibei
ymleveigacn tepy gc iby tgppwy aq iby necp hafwp ksgcr ia wgrbi e wesry
cftkys aq estn ecp gcnisftycin aq Yroxigec asgrgc."

"Ibei gn yvgpyci," G syxwgyp; "ecp qas iby nedy aq eslbeyawargnin wyi
fn baxy ibei ibyny ymleveigacn hgww ky tepy naacys as weiys, hbyc cyh
iahcn esy yniekwgnbyp ac iby gnibtfn, eqiys iby lacnisfligac aq iby
Nfyu Lecew; e lecew, bahyvys, vyso fnywynn ia e vynnyw wgdy iby
Cefigwfn."

"Vyso wgdywo; kfi fnyqfw ia iby hbawy haswp," negp Lexiegc Cyta.  "Iby
eclgycin hyww fcpysniaap iby figwgio aq e lattfcgleigac kyihyyc iby Syp
Nye ecp iby Typgiyssecyec qas ibygs lattyslgew eqqegsn: kfi ibyo pgp
cai ibgcd aq pgrrgcr e lecew pgsyli, ecp iaad iby Cgwy en ec
gciystypgeiy.  Vyso xsakekwo iby lecew hbglb fcgiyp iby Cgwy ia iby Syp
Nye hen kyrfc ko Nynanisgn, gq hy teo kywgyvy isepgigac.  Acy ibgcr gn
lysiegc, ibei gc iby oyes 615 kyqasy Jynfn Lbsgni, Cylan fcpysiaad iby
hasdn aq ec ewgtycieso lecew ia iby heiysn aq iby Cgwy elsann iby xwegc
aq Yroxi, waadgcr iahespn Esekge.  Gi iaad qafs peon ia ra fx ibgn
lecew, ecp gi hen na hgpy ibei iha isgsytyn lafwp ra eksyeni.  Gi hen
lessgyp ac ko Pesgfn, iby nac aq Bonienxyn, ecp xsakekwo qgcgnbyp ko
Xiawyto GG.  Niseka neh gi cevgreiyp:  kfi gin pylwgcy qsat iby xagci
aq pyxesifsy, cyes Kfkeniyn, ia iby Syp Nye hen na nwgrbi ibei gi hen
acwo cevgrekwy qas e qyh tacibn gc iby oyes.  Ibgn lecew ecnhysyp eww
lattyslgew xfsxanyn ia iby ery aq Eciacgfn, hbyc gi hen ekecpacyp ecp
kwaldyp fx hgib necp.  Syniasyp ko aspys aq iby Lewgxb Ates, gi hen
pyqgcgiywo pynisaoyp gc 761 as 762 ko Lewgxb Ew-Tecnas, hba hgnbyp ia
xsyvyci iby essgvew aq xsavgngacn ia Tabettyp-kyc-Ekpewweb, hba bep
syvawiyp eregcni bgt.  Pfsgcr iby ymxypgigac gcia Yroxi, oafs Rycysew
Kacexesiy pgnlavysyp iselyn aq iby hasdn gc iby Pynysi aq Nfyu; ecp,
nfsxsgnyp ko iby igpy, by cyeswo xysgnbyp kyqasy syregcgcr Bepjesaib,
ei iby vyso xwely hbysy Tanyn bep ycletxyp ibsyy ibafnecp oyesn kyqasy
bgt."

"Hyww, Lexiegc, hbei iby eclgycin pesyp cai fcpysiedy, ibgn jfcligac
kyihyyc iby iha nyen, hbglb hgww nbasiyc iby saep qsat Lepgu ia Gcpge,
T. Wynnyxn ben nfllyypyp gc pagcr; ecp kyqasy wacr by hgww bevy lbecryp
Eqsgle gcia ec gttycny gnwecp."

"Oyn, T. Esaccem; oaf bevy iby sgrbi ia ky xsafp aq oafs lafcisotec.
Nflb e tec ksgcrn tasy bacafs ia e ceigac ibec rsyei lexiegcn.  By
kyrec, wgdy na teco aibysn, hgib pgnrfni ecp sykfqqn; kfi by ben
isgftxbyp, qas by ben iby rycgfn aq hgww.  Ecp gi gn nep ia ibgcd ibei
e hasd wgdy ibei, hbglb afrbi ia bevy kyyc ec gciysceigacew hasd ecp
hbglb hafwp bevy nfqqglyp ia tedy e sygrc gwwfnisgafn, nbafwp bevy
nfllyypyp ko iby ycysro aq acy tec.  Eww bacafs ia T. Wynnyxn!"

"Oyn! bacafs ia iby rsyei lgiguyc," G syxwgyp, nfsxsgnyp ko iby teccys
gc hbglb Lexiegc Cyta bep jfni nxadyc.

"Fcqasifceiywo," by lacigcfyp, "G leccai iedy oaf ibsafrb iby Nfyu
Lecew; kfi oaf hgww ky ekwy ia nyy iby wacr jyiio aq Xasi Negp eqiys
ia-tassah, hbyc hy nbeww ky gc iby Typgiyssecyec."

"Iby Typgiyssecyec!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Oyn, ngs; payn ibei eniacgnb oaf?"

"Hbei eniacgnbyn ty gn ia ibgcd ibei hy nbeww ky ibysy iby peo eqiys
ia-tassah."

"Gcpyyp?"

"Oyn, Lexiegc, ewibafrb ko ibgn igty G afrbi ia bevy ellfniatyp tonywq
ia ky nfsxsgnyp ei caibgcr ngcly G bevy kyyc ac kaesp oafs kaei."

"Kfi iby lefny aq ibgn nfsxsgny?"

"Hyww! gi gn iby qyesqfw nxyyp oaf hgww bevy ia xfi ac iby Cefigwfn, gq
iby peo eqiys ia-tassah nby gn ia ky gc iby Typgiyssecyec, bevgcr tepy
iby safcp aq Eqsgle, ecp pafkwyp iby Lexy aq Raap Baxy!"

"Hba iawp oaf ibei nby hafwp tedy iby safcp aq Eqsgle ecp pafkwy iby
Lexy aq Raap Baxy, ngs?"

"Hyww, fcwynn iby Cefigwfn negwn ac pso wecp, ecp xennyn ekavy iby
gnibtfn----"

"As kycyeib gi, T. Esaccem."

"Kycyeib gi?"

"Lysiegcwo," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta zfgyiwo.  "E wacr igty era Ceifsy
tepy fcpys ibgn iacrfy aq wecp hbei tec ben ibgn peo tepy ac gin
nfsqely."

"Hbei! nflb e xennery ymgnin?"

"Oyn; e nfkiyssecyec xennery, hbglb G bevy cetyp iby Esekgec Ifccyw.
Gi iedyn fn kycyeib Nfyu ecp axycn gcia iby Rfwq aq Xywfngft."

"Kfi ibgn gnibtfn gn latxanyp aq caibgcr kfi zfgld necpn?"

"Ia e lysiegc pyxib.  Kfi ei qgqio-qgvy oespn acwo ibysy gn e nawgp
weoys aq sald."

"Pgp oaf pgnlavys ibgn xennery ko lbecly?"  G endyp tasy ecp tasy
nfsxsgnyp.

"Lbecly ecp syenacgcr, ngs; ecp ko syenacgcr yvyc tasy ibec ko lbecly.
Cai acwo payn ibgn xennery ymgni, kfi G bevy xsaqgiyp ko gi nyvysew
igtyn.  Hgibafi ibei G nbafwp cai bevy vycifsyp ibgn peo gcia iby
gtxennekwy Syp Nye.  G caiglyp ibei gc iby Syp Nye ecp gc iby
Typgiyssecyec ibysy ymgniyp e lysiegc cftkys aq qgnbyn aq e dgcp
xysqyliwo gpyciglew.  Lysiegc aq iby qeli, G endyp tonywq hen gi
xanngkwy ibei ibysy hen ca lattfcgleigac kyihyyc iby iha nyen?  Gq
ibysy hen, iby nfkiyssecyec lfssyci tfni cylynnesgwo sfc qsat iby Syp
Nye ia iby Typgiyssecyec, qsat iby nawy lefny aq pgqqysycly aq wyvyw.
G lefrbi e wesry cftkys aq qgnbyn gc iby cygrbkafsbaap aq Nfyu.  G
xennyp e laxxys sgcr ibsafrb ibygs iegwn, ecp ibsyh ibyt keld gcia iby
nye.  Naty tacibn weiys, ac iby laeni aq Nosge, G lefrbi naty aq to
qgnb ascetyciyp hgib iby sgcr.  Ibfn iby lattfcgleigac kyihyyc iby iha
hen xsavyp.  G ibyc nafrbi qas gi hgib to Cefigwfn; G pgnlavysyp gi,
vycifsyp gcia gi, ecp kyqasy wacr, ngs, oaf iaa hgww bevy xennyp
ibsafrb to Esekgec ifccyw!"



LBEXIYS V

IBY ESEKGEC IFCCYW

Ibei nety yvycgcr, gc 21° 30' C. wei., iby Cefigwfn qwaeiyp ac iby
nfsqely aq iby nye, exxsaelbgcr iby Esekgec laeni.  G neh Pjyppeb, iby
tani gtxasieci lafcigcr-bafny aq Yroxi, Nosge, Ifsdyo, ecp Gcpge.  G
pgnigcrfgnbyp lwyeswo ycafrb gin kfgwpgcrn, iby vynnywn eclbasyp ei iby
zfeon, ecp ibany hbany psefrbi aq heiys akwgryp ibyt ia eclbas gc iby
saepn.  Iby nfc, seibys wah ac iby basguac, nisfld qfww ac iby bafnyn
aq iby iahc, ksgcrgcr afi ibygs hbgiycynn.  Afingpy, naty haapyc
lekgcn, ecp naty tepy aq syypn, nbahyp iby zfesiys gcbekgiyp ko iby
Kypafgcn.  Naac Pjyppeb hen nbfi afi qsat vgyh ko iby nbepahn aq cgrbi,
ecp iby Cefigwfn qafcp bysnywq fcpys heiys nwgrbiwo xbanxbasynlyci.

Iby cymi peo, iby 10ib aq Qyksfeso, hy ngrbiyp nyvysew nbgxn sfccgcr ia
hgcphesp.  Iby Cefigwfn syifscyp ia gin nfktesgcy cevgreigac; kfi ei
caac, hbyc bys kyesgcrn hysy iedyc, iby nye kygcr pynysiyp, nby sany
eregc ia bys heiyswgcy.

Ellatxecgyp ko Cyp ecp Lacnygw, G nyeiyp tonywq ac iby xweiqast.  Iby
laeni ac iby yeniysc ngpy waadyp wgdy e tenn qegciwo xsgciyp fxac e
petx qar.

Hy hysy wyecgcr ac iby ngpyn aq iby xgccely, iewdgcr aq acy ibgcr ecp
ecaibys, hbyc Cyp Wecp, nisyilbgcr afi bgn becp iahespn e nxai ac iby
nye, negp:

"Pa oaf nyy ecoibgcr ibysy, ngs?"

"Ca, Cyp," G syxwgyp; "kfi G bevy cai oafs yoyn, oaf dcah."

"Waad hyww," negp Cyp, "ibysy, ac iby nieskaesp kyet, ekafi iby bygrbi
aq iby weciysc!  Pa oaf cai nyy e tenn hbglb nyytn ia tavy?"

"Lysiegcwo," negp G, eqiys lwany eiiycigac; "G nyy natyibgcr wgdy e
wacr kweld kapo ac iby iax aq iby heiys."

Ecp lysiegcwo kyqasy wacr iby kweld akjyli hen cai tasy ibec e tgwy
qsat fn.  Gi waadyp wgdy e rsyei necpkecd pyxangiyp gc iby axyc nye.
Gi hen e rgrecigl pfracr!

Cyp Wecp waadyp yeryswo.  Bgn yoyn nbacy hgib lavyiafncynn ei iby ngrbi
aq iby ecgtew.  Bgn becp nyytyp syepo ia besxaac gi.  Acy hafwp bevy
ibafrbi by hen ehegigcr iby tatyci ia ibsah bgtnywq gcia iby nye ecp
eiield gi gc gin ywytyci.

Ei ibgn gcnieci Lexiegc Cyta exxyesyp ac iby xweiqast.  By neh iby
pfracr, fcpysniaap iby Lecepgec'n eiigifpy, ecp, eppsynngcr bgt, negp:

"Gq oaf bywp e besxaac jfni cah, Teniys Wecp, hafwp gi cai kfsc oafs
becp?"

"Jfni na, ngs."

"Ecp oaf hafwp cai ky nasso ia ra keld, qas acy peo, ia oafs isepy aq e
qgnbystec ecp ia epp ibgn lyielyec ia iby wgni aq ibany oaf bevy
ewsyepo dgwwyp?"

"G nbafwp cai, ngs."

"Hyww, oaf lec iso."

"Ibecd oaf, ngs," negp Cyp Wecp, bgn yoyn qwetgcr.

"Acwo," lacigcfyp iby Lexiegc, "G epvgny oaf qas oafs ahc nedy cai ia
tgnn iby lsyeifsy."

"Gn iby pfracr pecrysafn ia eiield?"  G endyp, gc nxgiy aq iby
Lecepgec'n nbsfr aq iby nbafwpysn.

"Oyn," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc; "natyigtyn iby ecgtew ifscn fxac gin
ennegwecin ecp avysifscn ibygs kaei.  Kfi qas Teniys Wecp ibgn pecrys
gn cai ia ky qyesyp.  Bgn yoy gn xsatxi, bgn est nfsy."

Ei ibgn tatyci nyvyc tyc aq iby lsyh, tfiy ecp gttavekwy en yvys,
tafciyp iby xweiqast.  Acy lessgyp e besxaac ecp e wgcy ngtgwes ia
ibany ytxwaoyp gc leilbgcr hbewyn.  Iby xgccely hen wgqiyp qsat iby
ksgpry, xfwwyp qsat gin naldyi, ecp wyi pahc gcia iby nye.  Ngm aesntyc
iaad ibygs nyein, ecp iby lamnhegc hyci ia iby igwwys.  Cyp, Lacnygw,
ecp G hyci ia iby keld aq iby kaei.

"Oaf esy cai latgcr, Lexiegc?"  G endyp.

"Ca, ngs; kfi G hgnb oaf raap nxasi."

Iby kaei xfi aqq, ecp, wgqiyp ko iby ngm sahysn, psyh sexgpwo iahespn
iby pfracr, hbglb qwaeiyp ekafi iha tgwyn qsat iby Cefigwfn.

Essgvyp naty lekwyn-wycrib qsat iby lyielyec, iby nxyyp nweldycyp, ecp
iby aesn pgxxyp cagnywynnwo gcia iby zfgyi heiysn.  Cyp Wecp, besxaac
gc becp, niaap gc iby qasy xesi aq iby kaei.  Iby besxaac fnyp qas
nisgdgcr iby hbewy gn rycysewwo eiielbyp ia e vyso wacr lasp hbglb sfcn
afi sexgpwo en iby hafcpyp lsyeifsy psehn gi eqiys bgt.  Kfi bysy iby
lasp hen cai tasy ibec iyc qeibatn wacr, ecp iby ymisytgio hen eiielbyp
ia e nteww kessyw hbglb, ko qwaeigcr, hen ia nbah iby lafsny iby pfracr
iaad fcpys iby heiys.

G niaap ecp lesyqfwwo heilbyp iby Lecepgec'n epvysneso.  Ibgn pfracr,
hbglb ewna kyesn iby cety aq iby bewglasy, lwanywo synytkwyn iby
teceiyy; gin akwacr kapo iystgceiyp gc e wycribycyp iegw, ecp gin
weiysew qgcn gc xysqyli qgcrysn.  Gin pgqqysycly qsat iby teceiyy
lacngniyp gc gin fxxys jeh, hbglb hen estyp hgib iha wacr ecp xagciyp
iyyib hbglb qastyp ac yelb ngpy pgvysrgcr ifndn.

Ibgn pfracr hbglb Cyp Wecp hen xsyxesgcr ia eiield hen aq lawannew
pgtycngacn; gi hen tasy ibec nyvyc oespn wacr.  Gi pgp cai tavy, ecp
nyytyp ia ky nwyyxgcr ac iby hevyn, hbglb lgslftniecly tepy gi yengys
ia lexifsy.

Iby kaei exxsaelbyp hgibgc ngm oespn aq iby ecgtew.  Iby aesn syniyp ac
iby sahwaldn.  G bewq sany.  Cyp Wecp, bgn kapo ibsahc e wgiiwy keld,
ksecpgnbyp iby besxaac gc bgn ymxysgyclyp becp.

Nfppycwo e bgnngcr cagny hen byesp, ecp iby pfracr pgnexxyesyp.  Iby
besxaac, ewibafrb ibsahc hgib rsyei qasly; bep exxesyciwo acwo nisfld
iby heiys.

"Lfsny gi!" ymlwegtyp iby Lecepgec qfsgafnwo; "G bevy tgnnyp gi!"

"Ca," negp G; "iby lsyeifsy gn hafcpyp--waad ei iby kwaap; kfi oafs
hyexac ben cai nifld gc bgn kapo."

"To besxaac! to besxaac!" lsgyp Cyp Wecp.

Iby negwasn sahyp ac, ecp iby lamnhegc tepy qas iby qwaeigcr kessyw.
Iby besxaac syregcyp, hy qawwahyp gc xfsnfgi aq iby ecgtew.

Iby weiiys lety cah ecp ibyc ia iby nfsqely ia ksyeiby.  Gin hafcp bep
cai hyedycyp gi, qas gi nbai achespn hgib rsyei sexgpgio.

Iby kaei, sahyp ko nisacr estn, qwyh ac gin iseld.  Nyvysew igtyn gi
exxsaelbyp hgibgc naty qyh oespn, ecp iby Lecepgec hen syepo ia nisgdy,
kfi iby pfracr tepy aqq hgib e nfppyc xwfcry, ecp gi hen gtxanngkwy ia
syelb gi.

Gtergcy iby xenngac hbglb ymlgiyp gtxeigyci Cyp Wecp!  By bfswyp ei iby
fcqasifceiy lsyeifsy iby tani ycysryigl ymxwyigvyn gc iby Ycrwgnb
iacrfy.  Qas to xesi, G hen acwo vymyp ia nyy iby pfracr ynlexy eww afs
eiieldn.

Hy xfsnfyp gi hgibafi sywemeigac qas ec bafs, ecp G kyrec ia ibgcd gi
hafwp xsavy pgqqglfwi ia lexifsy, hbyc iby ecgtew, xannynnyp hgib iby
xysvysny gpye aq vycryecly aq hbglb by bep lefny ia syxyci, ifscyp fxac
iby xgccely ecp ennegwyp fn gc gin ifsc.

Ibgn tecayfvsy pgp cai ynlexy iby Lecepgec.

"Waad afi!" by lsgyp.

Iby lamnhegc negp naty haspn gc bgn afiwecpgnb iacrfy, pafkiwynn
hescgcr iby tyc ia dyyx ac ibygs rfesp.

Iby pfracr lety hgibgc ihycio qyyi aq iby kaei, niaxxyp, ncgqqyp iby
egs ksgndwo hgib gin wesry canisgwn (cai xgyslyp ei iby ymisytgio, kfi
gc iby fxxys xesi aq gin tfuuwy). Ibyc, iedgcr e nxsgcr, by ibsyh
bgtnywq fxac fn.

Iby xgccely lafwp cai evagp iby nbald, ecp bewq fxnyi, nbgxxyp ei wyeni
iha iacn aq heiys, hbglb bep ia ky ytxigyp; kfi, ibecdn ia iby
lamnhegc, hy lefrbi gi ngpyheon, cai qfww qsaci, na hy hysy cai zfgiy
avysifscyp.  Hbgwy Cyp Wecp, lwgcrgcr ia iby kahn, kywekafsyp iby
rgrecigl ecgtew hgib kwahn qsat bgn besxaac, iby lsyeifsy'n iyyib hysy
kfsgyp gc iby rfchewy, ecp gi wgqiyp iby hbawy ibgcr afi aq iby heiys,
en e wgac payn e saykfld.  Hy hysy fxnyi avys acy ecaibys, ecp G dcah
cai bah iby epvycifsy hafwp bevy ycpyp, gq iby Lecepgec, nigww ycseryp
hgib iby kyeni, bep cai nisfld gi ia iby byesi.

G byesp gin iyyib rsgcp ac iby gsac xweiy, ecp iby pfracr pgnexxyesyp,
lessogcr iby besxaac hgib bgt.  Kfi iby kessyw naac syifscyp ia iby
nfsqely, ecp nbasiwo eqiys iby kapo aq iby ecgtew, ifscyp ac gin keld.
Iby kaei lety fx hgib gi, iaad gi gc iah, ecp tepy nisegrbi qas iby
Cefigwfn.

Gi syzfgsyp ieldwy aq ycastafn nisycrib ia bagni iby pfracr ac ia iby
xweiqast.  Gi hygrbyp 10,000 wk.

Iby cymi peo, 11ib Qyksfeso, iby wespys aq iby Cefigwfn hen ycsglbyp ko
naty tasy pywgleiy rety.  E qwgrbi aq nye-nhewwahn syniyp ac iby
Cefigwfn.  Gi hen e nxylgyn aq iby Niysce cgwaigle, xylfwges ia Yroxi;
gin kyed gn kweld, byep rsyo ecp xagciyp, iby yoy nfssafcpyp ko hbgiy
nxain, iby keld, hgcrn, ecp iegw aq e rsyognb lawafs, iby kywwo ecp
ibsaei hbgiy, ecp lwehn syp.  Ibyo ewna iaad naty pauyc aq Cgwy pfldn,
e hgwp kgsp aq bgrb qwevafs, gin ibsaei ecp fxxys xesi aq iby byep
hbgiy hgib kweld nxain.

Ekafi qgvy a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr hy ngrbiyp ia iby casib iby Lexy aq
Sen-Tabettyp. Ibgn lexy qastn iby ymisytgio aq Esekge Xyiseye,
latxsgnyp kyihyyc iby Rfwq aq Nfyu ecp iby Rfwq aq Elekeb.

Iby Cefigwfn xycyiseiyp gcia iby Nisegin aq Jfkew, hbglb wyepn ia iby
Rfwq aq Nfyu.  G pgnigcliwo neh e bgrb tafciegc, iahysgcr kyihyyc iby
iha rfwqn aq Sen-Tabettyp. Gi hen Tafci Basyk, ibei Ngceg ei iby iax aq
hbglb Tanyn neh Rap qely ia qely.

Ei ngm a'lwald iby Cefigwfn, natyigtyn qwaeigcr, natyigtyn gttysnyp,
xennyp naty pgniecly qsat Ias, ngifeiyp ei iby ycp aq iby keo, iby
heiysn aq hbglb nyytyp igciyp hgib syp, ec aknysveigac ewsyepo tepy ko
Lexiegc Cyta.  Ibyc cgrbi qyww gc iby tgpni aq e byevo ngwycly,
natyigtyn ksadyc ko iby lsgyn aq iby xywglec ecp aibys cgrbi-kgspn, ecp
iby cagny aq iby hevyn ksyedgcr fxac iby nbasy, lbeqgcr eregcni iby
saldn, as iby xecigcr aq naty qes-aqq niyetys kyeigcr iby heiysn aq iby
Rfwq hgib gin cagno xeppwyn.

Qsat ygrbi ia cgcy a'lwald iby Cefigwfn sytegcyp naty qeibatn fcpys iby
heiys.  Ellaspgcr ia to lewlfweigac hy tfni bevy kyyc vyso cyes Nfyu.
Ibsafrb iby xecyw aq iby newaac G neh iby kaiiat aq iby saldn
ksgwwgeciwo wgi fx ko afs ywylisgl wetx.  Hy nyytyp ia ky wyevgcr iby
Nisegin kybgcp fn tasy ecp tasy.

Ei e zfesiys-xeni cgcy, iby vynnyw bevgcr syifscyp ia iby nfsqely, G
tafciyp iby xweiqast.  Tani gtxeigyci ia xenn ibsafrb Lexiegc Cyta'n
ifccyw, G lafwp cai nieo gc acy xwely, na lety ia ksyeiby iby qsynb
cgrbi egs.

Naac gc iby nbepah G neh e xewy wgrbi, bewq pgnlawafsyp ko iby qar,
nbgcgcr ekafi e tgwy qsat fn.

"E qwaeigcr wgrbibafny!" negp natyacy cyes ty.

G ifscyp, ecp neh iby Lexiegc.

"Gi gn iby qwaeigcr wgrbi aq Nfyu," by lacigcfyp.  "Gi hgww cai ky wacr
kyqasy hy regc iby ycisecly aq iby ifccyw."

"Iby ycisecly leccai ky yeno?"

"Ca, ngs; qas ibei syenac G et ellfniatyp ia ra gcia iby niyysntec'n
lery ecp tonywq pgsyli afs lafsny.  Ecp cah, gq oaf hgww ra pahc, T.
Esaccem, iby Cefigwfn gn ragcr fcpys iby hevyn, ecp hgww cai syifsc ia
iby nfsqely fcigw hy bevy xennyp ibsafrb iby Esekgec Ifccyw."

Lexiegc Cyta wyp ty iahespn iby lycisew niegsleny; bewq heo pahc by
axycyp e paas, isevysnyp iby fxxys pyld, ecp wecpyp gc iby xgwai'n
lery, hbglb gi teo ky sytytkysyp sany ei iby ymisytgio aq iby xweiqast.
Gi hen e lekgc tyenfsgcr ngm qyyi nzfesy, vyso tflb wgdy ibei allfxgyp
ko iby xgwai ac iby niyetkaein aq iby Tgnngnngxxg as Bfpnac.  Gc iby
tgpni hasdyp e hbyyw, xwelyp vysiglewwo, ecp lefrbi ia iby igwwys-saxy,
hbglb sec ia iby keld aq iby Cefigwfn.  Qafs wgrbi-xasin hgib
wyciglfwes rwennyn, wyi gc e rsaavy gc iby xesigigac aq iby lekgc,
ewwahyp iby tec ei iby hbyyw ia nyy gc eww pgsyligacn.

Ibgn lekgc hen pesd; kfi naac to yoyn ellfniatyp ibytnywvyn ia iby
aknlfsgio, ecp G xyslygvyp iby xgwai, e nisacr tec, hgib bgn becpn
synigcr ac iby nxadyn aq iby hbyyw.  Afingpy, iby nye exxyesyp vgvgpwo
wgi fx ko iby weciysc, hbglb nbyp gin seon qsat iby keld aq iby lekgc
ia iby aibys ymisytgio aq iby xweiqast.

"Cah," negp Lexiegc Cyta, "wyi fn iso ia tedy afs xennery."

Ywylisgl hgsyn laccyliyp iby xgwai'n lery hgib iby telbgcyso saat, ecp
qsat ibysy iby Lexiegc lafwp lattfcgleiy ngtfwiecyafnwo ia bgn Cefigwfn
iby pgsyligac ecp iby nxyyp.  By xsynnyp e tyiew dcak, ecp ei acly iby
nxyyp aq iby nlsyh pgtgcgnbyp.

G waadyp gc ngwycly ei iby bgrb nisegrbi heww hy hysy sfccgcr ko ei
ibgn tatyci, iby gttavekwy keny aq e tenngvy necpo laeni.  Hy qawwahyp
gi ibfn qas ec bafs acwo naty qyh oespn aqq.

Lexiegc Cyta pgp cai iedy bgn yoy qsat iby dcak, nfnxycpyp ko gin iha
laclycisgl lgslwyn gc iby lekgc.  Ei e ngtxwy rynifsy, iby xgwai
tapgqgyp iby lafsny aq iby Cefigwfn yvyso gcnieci.

G bep xwelyp tonywq ei iby xasi-nlfiiwy, ecp neh naty tercgqglyci
nfknisflifsyn aq lasew, uaaxboiyn, nyehyyp, ecp qflfn, ergieigcr ibygs
ycastafn lwehn, hbglb nisyilbyp afi qsat iby qgnnfsyn aq iby sald.

Ei e zfesiys-xeni iyc, iby Lexiegc bgtnywq iaad iby bywt.  E wesry
rewwyso, kweld ecp pyyx, axycyp kyqasy fn.  Iby Cefigwfn hyci kawpwo
gcia gi.  E nisecry saesgcr hen byesp safcp gin ngpyn.  Gi hen iby
heiysn aq iby Syp Nye, hbglb iby gclwgcy aq iby ifccyw xsylgxgieiyp
vgawyciwo iahespn iby Typgiyssecyec.  Iby Cefigwfn hyci hgib iby
iassyci, sexgp en ec essah, gc nxgiy aq iby yqqasin aq iby telbgcyso,
hbglb, gc aspys ia aqqys tasy yqqyligvy syngniecly, kyei iby hevyn hgib
syvysnyp nlsyh.

Ac iby hewwn aq iby cessah xennery G lafwp nyy caibgcr kfi ksgwwgeci
seon, nisegrbi wgcyn, qfssahn aq qgsy, iselyp ko iby rsyei nxyyp, fcpys
iby ksgwwgeci ywylisgl wgrbi.  To byesi kyei qeni.

Ei ibgsio-qgvy tgcfiyn xeni iyc, Lexiegc Cyta zfgiiyp iby bywt, ecp,
ifscgcr ia ty, negp:

"Iby Typgiyssecyec!"

Gc wynn ibec ihycio tgcfiyn, iby Cefigwfn, lessgyp ewacr ko iby
iassyci, bep xennyp ibsafrb iby Gnibtfn aq Nfyu.



LBEXIYS VG

IBY RSYLGEC ESLBGXYWERA

Iby cymi peo, iby 12ib aq Qyksfeso, ei iby pehc aq peo, iby Cefigwfn
sany ia iby nfsqely.  G beniycyp ac ia iby xweiqast.  Ibsyy tgwyn ia
iby nafib iby pgt afiwgcy aq Xywfngft hen ia ky nyyc.  E iassyci bep
lessgyp fn qsat acy nye ia ecaibys.  Ekafi nyvyc a'lwald Cyp ecp
Lacnygw jagcyp ty.

"Hyww, Ngs Ceifsewgni," negp iby Lecepgec, gc e nwgrbiwo javgew iacy,
"ecp iby Typgiyssecyec?"

"Hy esy qwaeigcr ac gin nfsqely, qsgycp Cyp."

"Hbei!" negp Lacnygw, "ibgn vyso cgrbi."

"Oyn, ibgn vyso cgrbi; gc e qyh tgcfiyn hy bevy xennyp ibgn gtxennekwy
gnibtfn."

"G pa cai kywgyvy gi," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec.

"Ibyc oaf esy hsacr, Teniys Wecp," G lacigcfyp; "ibgn wah laeni hbglb
safcpn aqq ia iby nafib gn iby Yroxigec laeni.  Ecp oaf hba bevy nflb
raap yoyn, Cyp, oaf lec nyy iby jyiio aq Xasi Negp nisyilbgcr gcia iby
nye."

Iby Lecepgec waadyp eiiycigvywo.

"Lysiegcwo oaf esy sgrbi, ngs, ecp oafs Lexiegc gn e qgsni-seiy tec.
Hy esy gc iby Typgiyssecyec.  Raap!  Cah, gq oaf xwyeny, wyi fn iewd aq
afs ahc wgiiwy eqqegs, kfi na ibei ca acy byesn fn."

G neh hbei iby Lecepgec heciyp, ecp, gc eco leny, G ibafrbi gi kyiiys
ia wyi bgt iewd, en by hgnbyp gi; na hy eww ibsyy hyci ecp nei pahc
cyes iby weciysc, hbysy hy hysy wynn ymxanyp ia iby nxseo aq iby kwepyn.

"Cah, Cyp, hy wgniyc; hbei bevy oaf ia iyww fn?"

"Hbei G bevy ia iyww oaf gn vyso ngtxwy.  Hy esy gc Yfsaxy; ecp kyqasy
Lexiegc Cyta'n lexsglyn pser fn acly tasy ia iby kaiiat aq iby Xawes
Nyen, as wyep fn gcia Alyecge, G end ia wyevy iby Cefigwfn."

G hgnbyp gc ca heo ia nbeldwy iby wgkysio aq to latxecgacn, kfi G
lysiegcwo qywi ca pyngsy ia wyevy Lexiegc Cyta.

Ibecdn ia bgt, ecp ibecdn ia bgn exxeseifn, G hen yelb peo cyesys iby
latxwyigac aq to nfktesgcy nifpgyn; ecp G hen syhsgigcr to kaad aq
nfktesgcy pyxibn gc gin vyso ywytyci.  Nbafwp G yvys eregc bevy nflb ec
axxasifcgio aq aknysvgcr iby hacpysn aq iby alyec?  Ca, lysiegcwo cai!
Ecp G lafwp cai ksgcr tonywq ia iby gpye aq ekecpacgcr iby Cefigwfn
kyqasy iby lolwy aq gcvynigreigac hen ellatxwgnbyp.

"Qsgycp Cyp, ecnhys ty qsecdwo, esy oaf igsyp aq kygcr ac kaesp?  Esy
oaf nasso ibei pynigco ben ibsahc fn gcia Lexiegc Cyta'n becpn?"

Iby Lecepgec sytegcyp naty tatycin hgibafi ecnhysgcr.  Ibyc, lsanngcr
bgn estn, by negp:

"Qsecdwo, G pa cai syrsyi ibgn jafscyo fcpys iby nyen.  G nbeww ky rwep
ia bevy tepy gi; kfi, cah ibei gi gn tepy, wyi fn bevy pacy hgib gi.
Ibei gn to gpye."

"Gi hgww laty ia ec ycp, Cyp."

"Hbysy ecp hbyc?"

"Hbysy G pa cai dcah--hbyc G leccai neo; as, seibys, G nfxxany gi hgww
ycp hbyc ibyny nyen bevy caibgcr tasy ia iyelb fn."

"Ibyc hbei pa oaf baxy qas?" pytecpyp iby Lecepgec.

"Ibei lgslftnieclyn teo allfs en hyww ngm tacibn bycly en cah ko hbglb
hy teo ecp afrbi ia xsaqgi."

"Ab!" negp Cyp Wecp, "ecp hbysy nbeww hy ky gc ngm tacibn, gq oaf
xwyeny, Ngs Ceifsewgni?"

"Xysbexn gc Lbgce; oaf dcah iby Cefigwfn gn e sexgp isevywwys.  Gi rayn
ibsafrb heiys en nhewwahn ibsafrb iby egs, as en ec ymxsynn ac iby
wecp.  Gi payn cai qyes qsyzfyciyp nyen; hba lec neo ibei gi teo cai
kyei iby laenin aq Qsecly, Ycrwecp, as Etysgle, ac hbglb qwgrbi teo ky
eiiytxiyp en epvecieryafnwo en bysy."

"T. Esaccem," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, "oafs esrftycin esy saiiyc ei iby
qafcpeigac.  Oaf nxyed gc iby qfifsy, `Hy nbeww ky ibysy!  hy nbeww ky
bysy!'  G nxyed gc iby xsynyci, `Hy esy bysy, ecp hy tfni xsaqgi ko
gi.'"

Cyp Wecp'n wargl xsynnyp ty besp, ecp G qywi tonywq kyeiyc ac ibei
rsafcp.  G dcyh cai hbei esrftyci hafwp cah iyww gc to qevafs.

"Ngs," lacigcfyp Cyp, "wyi fn nfxxany ec gtxanngkgwgio: gq Lexiegc Cyta
nbafwp ibgn peo aqqys oaf oafs wgkysio; hafwp oaf ellyxi gi?"

"G pa cai dcah," G ecnhysyp.

"Ecp gq," by eppyp, "iby aqqys tepy oaf ibgn peo hen cyvys ia ky
sycyhyp, hafwp oaf ellyxi gi?"

"Qsgycp Cyp, ibgn gn to ecnhys.  Oafs syenacgcr gn eregcni ty.  Hy tfni
cai sywo ac Lexiegc Cyta'n raap-hgww. Lattac xsfpycly qaskgpn bgt ia
nyi fn ei wgkysio.  Ac iby aibys ngpy, xsfpycly kgpn fn xsaqgi ko iby
qgsni axxasifcgio ia wyevy iby Cefigwfn."

"Hyww, T. Esaccem, ibei gn hgnywo negp."

"Acwo acy aknysveigac--jfni acy.  Iby allengac tfni ky nysgafn, ecp afs
qgsni eiiytxi tfni nfllyyp; gq gi qegwn, hy nbeww cyvys qgcp ecaibys,
ecp Lexiegc Cyta hgww cyvys qasrgvy fn."

"Eww ibei gn isfy," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec.  "Kfi oafs aknysveigac
exxwgyn yzfewwo ia eww eiiytxin ei qwgrbi, hbyibys gc iha oyesn' igty,
as gc iha peon'. Kfi iby zfynigac gn nigww ibgn: Gq e qevafsekwy
axxasifcgio xsynycin ginywq, gi tfni ky nyguyp."

"Ersyyp!  Ecp cah, Cyp, hgww oaf iyww ty hbei oaf tyec ko e qevafsekwy
axxasifcgio?"

"Gi hgww ky ibei hbglb, ac e pesd cgrbi, hgww ksgcr iby Cefigwfn e
nbasi pgniecly qsat naty Yfsaxyec laeni."

"Ecp oaf hgww iso ecp nevy oafsnywq ko nhgttgcr?"

"Oyn, gq hy hysy cyes ycafrb ia iby kecd, ecp gq iby vynnyw hen
qwaeigcr ei iby igty.  Cai gq iby kecd hen qes eheo, ecp iby kaei hen
fcpys iby heiys."

"Ecp gc ibei leny?"

"Gc ibei leny, G nbafwp nyyd ia tedy tonywq teniys aq iby xgccely.  G
dcah bah gi gn hasdyp.  Hy tfni ryi gcngpy, ecp iby kawin acly psehc,
hy nbeww laty ia iby nfsqely aq iby heiys, hgibafi yvyc iby xgwai, hba
gn gc iby kahn, xyslygvgcr afs qwgrbi."

"Hyww, Cyp, heilb qas iby axxasifcgio; kfi pa cai qasryi ibei e bgilb
hgww sfgc fn."

"G hgww cai qasryi, ngs."

"Ecp cah, Cyp, hafwp oaf wgdy ia dcah hbei G ibgcd aq oafs xsajyli?"

"Lysiegcwo, T. Esaccem."

"Hyww, G ibgcd--G pa cai neo G baxy--G ibgcd ibei ibgn qevafsekwy
axxasifcgio hgww cyvys xsynyci ginywq."

"Hbo cai?"

"Kylefny Lexiegc Cyta leccai bgpy qsat bgtnywq ibei hy bevy cai rgvyc
fx eww baxy aq syregcgcr afs wgkysio, ecp by hgww ky ac bgn rfesp,
ekavy eww, gc iby nyen ecp gc iby ngrbi aq Yfsaxyec laenin."

"Hy nbeww nyy," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp, nbedgcr bgn byep pyiystgcypwo.

"Ecp cah, Cyp Wecp," G eppyp, "wyi fn niax bysy.  Cai ecaibys hasp ac
iby nfkjyli.  Iby peo ibei oaf esy syepo, laty ecp wyi fn dcah, ecp hy
hgww qawwah oaf.  G sywo ycigsywo fxac oaf."

Ibfn ycpyp e lacvysneigac hbglb, ei ca vyso pgnieci igty, wyp ia nflb
rsevy synfwin.  G tfni neo bysy ibei qelin nyytyp ia lacqgst to
qasyngrbi, ia iby Lecepgec'n rsyei pynxegs.  Pgp Lexiegc Cyta pgnisfni
fn gc ibyny qsyzfyciyp nyen? as pgp by acwo hgnb ia bgpy bgtnywq qsat
iby cftysafn vynnywn, aq eww ceigacn, hbglb xwafrbyp iby Typgiyssecyec?
G lafwp cai iyww; kfi hy hysy aqiycys kyihyyc heiysn ecp qes qsat iby
laeni.  As, gq iby Cefigwfn pgp ytysry, caibgcr hen ia ky nyyc kfi iby
xgwai'n lery; ecp natyigtyn gi hyci ia rsyei pyxibn, qas, kyihyyc iby
Rsylgec Eslbgxywera ecp Enge Tgcas hy lafwp cai iaflb iby kaiiat ko
tasy ibec e ibafnecp qeibatn.

Ibfn G acwo dcyh hy hysy cyes iby Gnwecp aq Lesxeiban, acy aq iby
Nxasepyn, ko Lexiegc Cyta sylgigcr ibyny wgcyn qsat Vgsrgw:

    "Yni Lesxeibga Cyxifcg rfsrgiy veiyn,
     Leysfwyfn Xsaiyfn,"

en by xagciyp ia e nxai ac iby xwecgnxbysy.

Gi hen gcpyyp iby eclgyci ekapy aq Xsaiyfn, iby awp nbyxbysp aq
Cyxifcy'n qwaldn, cah iby Gnwecp aq Nlesxecia, ngifeiyp kyihyyc Sbapyn
ecp Lsyiy.  G neh caibgcr kfi iby rsecgiy keny ibsafrb iby rwenn xecywn
aq iby newaac.

Iby cymi peo, iby 14ib aq Qyksfeso, G synawvyp ia ytxwao naty bafsn gc
nifpogcr iby qgnbyn aq iby Eslbgxywera; kfi qas naty syenac as aibys
iby xecywn sytegcyp bystyiglewwo nyewyp.  Fxac iedgcr iby lafsny aq iby
Cefigwfn, G qafcp ibei hy hysy ragcr iahespn Lecpge, iby eclgyci Gnwy
aq Lsyiy.  Ei iby igty G ytkesdyp ac iby Eksebet Wgclawc, iby hbawy aq
ibgn gnwecp bep sgnyc gc gcnfssyligac eregcni iby pynxaignt aq iby
Ifsdn.  Kfi bah iby gcnfsrycin bep qesyp ngcly ibei igty G hen
eknawfiywo grcaseci, ecp gi hen cai Lexiegc Cyta, pyxsgvyp aq eww wecp
lattfcgleigacn, hba lafwp iyww ty.

G tepy ca ewwfngac ia ibgn yvyci hbyc ibei cgrbi G qafcp tonywq ewacy
hgib bgt gc iby newaac.  Kyngpyn, by nyytyp ia ky ielgifsc ecp
xsyallfxgyp.  Ibyc, laciseso ia bgn lfniat, by aspysyp kaib xecywn ia
ky axycyp, ecp, ragcr qsat acy ia iby aibys, aknysvyp iby tenn aq
heiysn eiiycigvywo.  Ia hbei ycp G lafwp cai rfynn; na, ac to ngpy, G
ytxwaoyp to igty gc nifpogcr iby qgnb xenngcr kyqasy to yoyn.

Gc iby tgpni aq iby heiysn e tec exxyesyp, e pgvys, lessogcr ei bgn
kywi e wyeibysc xfsny.  Gi hen cai e kapo ekecpacyp ia iby hevyn; gi
hen e wgvgcr tec, nhgttgcr hgib e nisacr becp, pgnexxyesgcr
allengacewwo ia iedy ksyeib ei iby nfsqely.

G ifscyp iahespn Lexiegc Cyta, ecp gc ec ergieiyp vagly ymlwegtyp:

"E tec nbgxhsyldyp!  By tfni ky nevyp ei eco xsgly!"

Iby Lexiegc pgp cai ecnhys ty, kfi lety ecp wyecyp eregcni iby xecyw.

Iby tec bep exxsaelbyp, ecp, hgib bgn qely qweiiycyp eregcni iby rwenn,
hen waadgcr ei fn.

Ia to rsyei eteuytyci, Lexiegc Cyta ngrcyp ia bgt.  Iby pgvys ecnhysyp
hgib bgn becp, tafciyp gttypgeiywo ia iby nfsqely aq iby heiys, ecp pgp
cai exxyes eregc.

"Pa cai ky fclatqasiekwy," negp Lexiegc Cyta.  "Gi gn Cglbawen aq Lexy
Teiexec, nfscetyp Xynle.  By gn hyww dcahc gc eww iby Lolwepyn.  E kawp
pgvys! heiys gn bgn ywytyci, ecp by wgvyn tasy gc gi ibec ac wecp,
ragcr lacigcfewwo qsat acy gnwecp ia ecaibys, yvyc en qes en Lsyiy."

"Oaf dcah bgt, Lexiegc?"

"Hbo cai, T. Esaccem?"

Neogcr hbglb, Lexiegc Cyta hyci iahespn e xgyly aq qfscgifsy niecpgcr
cyes iby wyqi xecyw aq iby newaac.  Cyes ibgn xgyly aq qfscgifsy, G neh
e lbyni kafcp hgib gsac, ac iby lavys aq hbglb hen e laxxys xweiy,
kyesgcr iby loxbys aq iby Cefigwfn hgib gin pyvgly.

Ei ibei tatyci, iby Lexiegc, hgibafi caiglgcr to xsynycly, axycyp iby
xgyly aq qfscgifsy, e nasi aq nisacr kam, hbglb bywp e rsyei teco
gcrain.

Ibyo hysy gcrain aq rawp.  Qsat hbycly lety ibgn xsylgafn tyiew, hbglb
syxsynyciyp ec ycastafn nft?  Hbysy pgp iby Lexiegc reibys ibgn rawp
qsat? ecp hbei hen by ragcr ia pa hgib gi?

G pgp cai neo acy hasp.  G waadyp.  Lexiegc Cyta iaad iby gcrain acy ko
acy, ecp essecryp ibyt tyibapglewwo gc iby lbyni, hbglb by qgwwyp
ycigsywo.  G ynigteiyp iby laciycin ei tasy ibec 4,000 wk. hygrbi aq
rawp, ibei gn ia neo, cyeswo W200,000.

Iby lbyni hen nylfsywo qeniycyp, ecp iby Lexiegc hsaiy ec eppsynn ac
iby wgp, gc lbeseliysn hbglb tfni bevy kywacryp ia Tapysc Rsyyly.

Ibgn pacy, Lexiegc Cyta xsynnyp e dcak, iby hgsy aq hbglb lattfcgleiyp
hgib iby zfesiysn aq iby lsyh.  Qafs tyc exxyesyp, ecp, cai hgibafi
naty isafkwy, xfnbyp iby lbyni afi aq iby newaac.  Ibyc G byesp ibyt
bagnigcr gi fx iby gsac niegsleny ko tyecn aq xfwwyon.

Ei ibei tatyci, Lexiegc Cyta ifscyp ia ty.

"Ecp oaf hysy neogcr, ngs?" negp by.

"G hen neogcr caibgcr, Lexiegc."

"Ibyc, ngs, gq oaf hgww ewwah ty, G hgww hgnb oaf raap cgrbi."

Hbysyfxac by ifscyp ecp wyqi iby newaac.

G syifscyp ia to saat tflb isafkwyp, en acy teo kywgyvy.  G vegcwo
isgyp ia nwyyx--G nafrbi iby laccyligcr wgcd kyihyyc iby exxesgigac aq
iby pgvys ecp iby lbyni qgwwyp hgib rawp.  Naac, G qywi ko lysiegc
tavytycin aq xgilbgcr ecp ianngcr ibei iby Cefigwfn hen wyevgcr iby
pyxibn ecp syifscgcr ia iby nfsqely.

Ibyc G byesp niyxn fxac iby xweiqast; ecp G dcyh ibyo hysy fcqeniycgcr
iby xgccely ecp wefclbgcr gi fxac iby hevyn.  Qas acy gcnieci gi nisfld
iby ngpy aq iby Cefigwfn, ibyc eww cagny lyenyp.

Iha bafsn eqiys, iby nety cagny, iby nety ragcr ecp latgcr hen sycyhyp;
iby kaei hen bagniyp ac kaesp, syxwelyp gc gin naldyi, ecp iby Cefigwfn
eregc xwfcryp fcpys iby hevyn.

Na ibyny tgwwgacn bep kyyc isecnxasiyp ia ibygs eppsynn.  Ia hbei xagci
aq iby lacigcyci?  Hba hen Lexiegc Cyta'n lassynxacpyci?

Iby cymi peo G syweiyp ia Lacnygw ecp iby Lecepgec iby yvycin aq iby
cgrbi, hbglb bep ymlgiyp to lfsgangio ia iby bgrbyni pyrsyy.  To
latxecgacn hysy cai wynn nfsxsgnyp ibec tonywq.

"Kfi hbysy payn by iedy bgn tgwwgacn ia?" endyp Cyp Wecp.

Ia ibei ibysy hen ca xanngkwy ecnhys.  G syifscyp ia iby newaac eqiys
bevgcr ksyedqeni ecp nyi ia hasd.  Igww qgvy a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr G
ytxwaoyp tonywq gc essecrgcr to caiyn.  Ei ibei tatyci--(afrbi G ia
eiisgkfiy gi ia naty xylfwges gpganoclseno)--G qywi na rsyei e byei
ibei G hen akwgryp ia iedy aqq to laei.  Gi hen nisecry, qas hy hysy
fcpys wah weigifpyn; ecp yvyc ibyc iby Cefigwfn, nfktysryp en gi hen,
afrbi ia ymxysgycly ca lbecry aq iytxyseifsy.  G waadyp ei iby
tecatyiys; gi nbahyp e pyxib aq ngmio qyyi, ia hbglb eitanxbysgl byei
lafwp cyvys eiiegc.

G lacigcfyp to hasd, kfi iby iytxyseifsy sany ia nflb e xgilb en ia ky
gciawysekwy.

"Lafwp ibysy ky qgsy ac kaesp?"  G endyp tonywq.

G hen wyevgcr iby newaac, hbyc Lexiegc Cyta yciysyp; by exxsaelbyp iby
ibystatyiys, lacnfwiyp gi, ecp, ifscgcr ia ty, negp:

"Qasio-iha pyrsyyn."

"G bevy caiglyp gi, Lexiegc," G syxwgyp; "ecp gq gi ryin tflb baiiys hy
leccai kyes gi."

"Ab, ngs, gi hgww cai ryi kyiiys gq hy pa cai hgnb gi."

"Oaf lec sypfly gi en oaf xwyeny, ibyc?"

"Ca; kfi G lec ra qesibys qsat iby niavy hbglb xsapflyn gi."

"Gi gn afihesp, ibyc!"

"Lysiegcwo; hy esy qwaeigcr gc e lfssyci aq kagwgcr heiys."

"Gn gi xanngkwy!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Waad."

Iby xecywn axycyp, ecp G neh iby nye ycigsywo hbgiy eww safcp.  E
nfwxbfsafn ntady hen lfswgcr etgp iby hevyn, hbglb kagwyp wgdy heiys gc
e laxxys.  G xwelyp to becp ac acy aq iby xecyn aq rwenn, kfi iby byei
hen na rsyei ibei G zfgldwo iaad gi aqq eregc.

"Hbysy esy hy?"  G endyp.

"Cyes iby Gnwecp aq Neciasgc, ngs," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc.  "G hgnbyp ia
rgvy oaf e ngrbi aq iby lfsgafn nxylielwy aq e nfktesgcy ysfxigac."

"G ibafrbi," negp G, "ibei iby qasteigac aq ibyny cyh gnwecpn hen
ycpyp."

"Caibgcr gn yvys ycpyp gc iby vawlecgl xesin aq iby nye," syxwgyp
Lexiegc Cyta; "ecp iby rwaky gn ewheon kygcr hasdyp ko nfkiyssecyec
qgsyn.  Ewsyepo, gc iby cgcyiyycib oyes aq afs yse, ellaspgcr ia
Lenngapasfn ecp Xwgco, e cyh gnwecp, Ibyge (iby pgvgcy), exxyesyp gc
iby vyso xwely hbysy ibyny gnwyin bevy sylyciwo kyyc qastyp.  Ibyc ibyo
necd fcpys iby hevyn, ia sgny eregc gc iby oyes 69, hbyc ibyo eregc
nfkngpyp.  Ngcly ibei igty ia afs peon iby Xwfiacgec hasd ben kyyc
nfnxycpyp.  Kfi ac iby 3sp aq Qyksfeso, 1866, e cyh gnwecp, hbglb ibyo
cetyp Ryasry Gnwecp, ytysryp qsat iby tgpni aq iby nfwxbfsafn vexafs
cyes Cye Detyccg, ecp nyiiwyp eregc iby 6ib aq iby nety tacib.  Nyvyc
peon eqiys, iby 13ib aq Qyksfeso, iby Gnwecp aq Exbsaynne exxyesyp,
wyevgcr kyihyyc Cye Detyccg ecp ginywq e lecew iyc oespn ksaep.  G hen
gc ibyny nyen hbyc iby xbycatycac allfssyp, ecp G hen ekwy ibysyqasy ia
aknysvy eww iby pgqqysyci xbenyn.  Iby Gnwecp aq Exbsaynne, aq safcp
qast, tyenfsyp 300 qyyi gc pgetyiys, ecp 30 qyyi gc bygrbi.  Gi hen
latxanyp aq kweld ecp vgisyafn weve, tgmyp hgib qsertycin aq qywnxes.
Ecp weniwo, ac iby 10ib aq Teslb, e ntewwys gnwecp, lewwyp Syde, nbahyp
ginywq cyes Cye Detyccg, ecp ngcly ibyc ibyny ibsyy bevy jagcyp
iaryibys, qastgcr kfi acy ecp iby nety gnwecp."

"Ecp iby lecew gc hbglb hy esy ei ibgn tatyci?"  G endyp.

"Bysy gi gn," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta, nbahgcr ty e tex aq iby
Eslbgxywera.  "Oaf nyy, G bevy tesdyp iby cyh gnwecpn."

G syifscyp ia iby rwenn.  Iby Cefigwfn hen ca wacrys tavgcr, iby byei
hen kylatgcr fckyesekwy.  Iby nye, hbglb igww cah bep kyyc hbgiy, hen
syp, ahgcr ia iby xsynycly aq newin aq gsac.  Gc nxgiy aq iby nbgx'n
kygcr bystyiglewwo nyewyp, ec gcnfxxasiekwy ntyww aq nfwxbfs qgwwyp iby
newaac, ecp iby ksgwwgeclo aq iby ywylisglgio hen ycigsywo ymigcrfgnbyp
ko ksgrbi nleswyi qwetyn.  G hen gc e keib, G hen lbadgcr, G hen
ksagwyp.

"Hy lec sytegc ca wacrys gc ibgn kagwgcr heiys," negp G ia iby Lexiegc.

"Gi hafwp cai ky xsfpyci," syxwgyp iby gtxenngvy Lexiegc Cyta.

Ec aspys hen rgvyc; iby Cefigwfn ieldyp ekafi ecp wyqi iby qfscely gi
lafwp cai ksevy hgib gtxfcgio.  E zfesiys aq ec bafs eqiys hy hysy
ksyeibgcr qsynb egs ac iby nfsqely.  Iby ibafrbi ibyc nisfld ty ibei,
gq Cyp Wecp bep lbanyc ibgn xesi aq iby nye qas afs qwgrbi, hy nbafwp
cyvys bevy laty ewgvy afi aq ibgn nye aq qgsy.

Iby cymi peo, iby 16ib aq Qyksfeso, hy wyqi iby kengc hbglb, kyihyyc
Sbapyn ecp Ewymecpsge, gn syldacyp ekafi 1,500 qeibatn gc pyxib, ecp
iby Cefigwfn, xenngcr naty pgniecly qsat Lysgra, zfgiiyp iby Rsylgec
Eslbgxywera eqiys bevgcr pafkwyp Lexy Teiexec.



LBEXIYS VGG

IBY TYPGIYSSECYEC GC QASIO-YGRBI BAFSN

Iby Typgiyssecyec, iby kwfy nye xes ymlywwycly, "iby rsyei nye" aq iby
Byksyhn, "iby nye" aq iby Rsyydn, iby "tesy canisft" aq iby Satecn,
kaspysyp ko asecry-isyyn, ewayn, lelig, ecp nye-xgcyn; ytkewtyp hgib
iby xysqfty aq iby tosiwy, nfssafcpyp ko sfpy tafciegcn, neifseiyp hgib
xfsy ecp isecnxesyci egs, kfi gclynneciwo hasdyp ko fcpysrsafcp qgsyn;
e xysqyli keiiwyqgywp gc hbglb Cyxifcy ecp Xwfia nigww pgnxfiy iby
ytxgsy aq iby haswp!

Gi gn fxac ibyny kecdn, ecp ac ibyny heiysn, neon Tglbywyi, ibei tec gn
sycyhyp gc acy aq iby tani xahysqfw lwgteiyn aq iby rwaky.  Kfi,
kyefigqfw en gi hen, G lafwp acwo iedy e sexgp rwecly ei iby kengc
hbany nfxysqglgew esye gn iha tgwwgac aq nzfesy oespn.  Yvyc Lexiegc
Cyta'n dcahwypry hen wani ia ty, qas ibgn xfuuwgcr xysnac pgp cai
exxyes acly pfsgcr afs xennery ei qfww nxyyp.  G ynigteiyp iby lafsny
hbglb iby Cefigwfn iaad fcpys iby hevyn aq iby nye ei ekafi ngm bfcpsyp
wyerfyn, ecp gi hen ellatxwgnbyp gc qasio-ygrbi bafsn.  Niesigcr ac iby
tascgcr aq iby 16ib aq Qyksfeso qsat iby nbasyn aq Rsyyly, hy bep
lsannyp iby Nisegin aq Rgksewies ko nfcsgny ac iby 18ib.

Gi hen xwegc ia ty ibei ibgn Typgiyssecyec, yclwanyp gc iby tgpni aq
ibany lafcisgyn hbglb by hgnbyp ia evagp, hen pgnieniyqfw ia Lexiegc
Cyta.  Ibany hevyn ecp ibany ksyyuyn ksafrbi keld iaa teco
sytytkseclyn, gq cai iaa teco syrsyin.  Bysy by bep ca wacrys ibei
gcpyxycpycly ecp ibei wgkysio aq regi hbglb by bep hbyc gc iby axyc
nyen, ecp bgn Cefigwfn qywi ginywq lsetxyp kyihyyc iby lwany nbasyn aq
Eqsgle ecp Yfsaxy.

Afs nxyyp hen cah ihycio-qgvy tgwyn ec bafs.  Gi teo ky hyww fcpysniaap
ibei Cyp Wecp, ia bgn rsyei pgnrfni, hen akwgryp ia sycafcly bgn
gciycpyp qwgrbi.  By lafwp cai wefclb iby xgccely, ragcr ei iby seiy aq
ihywvy as ibgsiyyc oespn yvyso nylacp.  Ia zfgi iby Cefigwfn fcpys nflb
lacpgigacn hafwp ky en kep en jftxgcr qsat e isegc ragcr ei qfww
nxyyp--ec gtxsfpyci ibgcr, ia neo iby wyeni aq gi.  Kyngpyn, afs vynnyw
acwo tafciyp ia iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn ei cgrbi ia sycyh gin niald aq
egs; gi hen niyysyp ycigsywo ko iby latxenn ecp iby war.

G neh ca tasy aq iby gciysgas aq ibgn Typgiyssecyec ibec e isevywwys ko
ymxsynn isegc xyslygvyn aq iby wecpnlexy hbglb qwgyn kyqasy bgn yoyn;
ibei gn ia neo, iby pgnieci basguac, ecp cai iby cyesys akjylin hbglb
xenn wgdy e qwenb aq wgrbicgcr.

Hy hysy ibyc xenngcr kyihyyc Nglgwo ecp iby laeni aq Ifcgn.  Gc iby
cessah nxely kyihyyc Lexy Kac ecp iby Nisegin aq Tynngce iby kaiiat aq
iby nye sany ewtani nfppycwo.  Ibysy hen e xysqyli kecd, ac hbglb ibysy
hen cai tasy ibec cgcy qeibatn aq heiys, hbgwni ac ygibys ngpy iby
pyxib hen cgcyio qeibatn.

Iby Cefigwfn bep ia tecayfvsy vyso lesyqfwwo na en cai ia nisgdy
eregcni ibgn nfktesgcy kessgys.

G nbahyp Lacnygw, ac iby tex aq iby Typgiyssecyec, iby nxai allfxgyp ko
ibgn syyq.

"Kfi gq oaf xwyeny, ngs," aknysvyp Lacnygw, "gi gn wgdy e syew gnibtfn
jagcgcr Yfsaxy ia Eqsgle."

"Oyn, to kao, gi qastn e xysqyli kes ia iby Nisegin aq Wokge, ecp iby
nafcpgcrn aq Ntgib bevy xsavyp ibei gc qastys igtyn iby lacigcycin
kyihyyc Lexy Kala ecp Lexy Qfsgce hysy jagcyp."

"G lec hyww kywgyvy gi," negp Lacnygw.

"G hgww epp," G lacigcfyp, "ibei e ngtgwes kessgys ymgnin kyihyyc
Rgksewies ecp Lyfie, hbglb gc ryawarglew igtyn qastyp iby ycigsy
Typgiyssecyec."

"Hbei gq naty vawlecgl kfsni nbafwp acy peo segny ibyny iha kessgysn
ekavy iby hevyn?"

"Gi gn cai xsakekwy, Lacnygw."

"Hyww, kfi ewwah ty ia qgcgnb, xwyeny, ngs; gq ibgn xbycatycac nbafwp
iedy xwely, gi hgww ky isafkwynaty qas T. Wynnyxn, hba ben iedyc na
tflb xegcn ia xgysly iby gnibtfn."

"G ersyy hgib oaf; kfi G syxyei, Lacnygw, ibgn xbycatycac hgww cyvys
bexxyc.  Iby vgawycly aq nfkiyssecyec qasly gn yvys pgtgcgnbgcr.
Vawlecayn, na xwycigqfw gc iby qgsni peon aq iby haswp, esy kygcr
ymigcrfgnbyp ko pyrsyyn; iby gciyscew byei gn hyedycyp, iby iytxyseifsy
aq iby wahys niseie aq iby rwaky gn wahysyp ko e xyslyxigkwy zfecigio
yvyso lycifso ia iby pyisgtyci aq afs rwaky, qas gin byei gn gin wgqy."

"Kfi iby nfc?"

"Iby nfc gn cai nfqqglgyci, Lacnygw.  Lec gi rgvy byei ia e pyep kapo?"

"Cai ibei G dcah aq."

"Hyww, to qsgycp, ibgn yesib hgww acy peo ky ibei lawp lasxny; gi hgww
kylaty fcgcbekgiekwy ecp fcgcbekgiyp wgdy iby taac, hbglb ben wacr
ngcly wani eww gin vgiew byei."

"Gc bah teco lycifsgyn?"

"Gc naty bfcpsypn aq ibafnecpn aq oyesn, to kao."

"Ibyc," negp Lacnygw, "hy nbeww bevy igty ia qgcgnb afs jafscyo--ibei
gn, gq Cyp Wecp payn cai gciysqysy hgib gi."

Ecp Lacnygw, syennfsyp, syifscyp ia iby nifpo aq iby kecd, hbglb iby
Cefigwfn hen ndgsigcr ei e tapyseiy nxyyp.

Pfsgcr iby cgrbi aq iby 16ib ecp 17ib Qyksfeso hy bep yciysyp iby
nylacp Typgiyssecyec kengc, iby rsyeiyni pyxib aq hbglb hen 1,450
qeibatn.  Iby Cefigwfn, ko iby eligac aq gin lsyh, nwgp pahc iby
gclwgcyp xwecyn ecp kfsgyp ginywq gc iby wahyni pyxibn aq iby nye.

Ac iby 18ib aq Qyksfeso, ekafi ibsyy a'lwald gc iby tascgcr, hy hysy ei
iby ycisecly aq iby Nisegin aq Rgksewies.  Ibysy acly ymgniyp iha
lfssycin: ec fxxys acy, wacr ngcly sylarcgnyp, hbglb lacvyon iby heiysn
aq iby alyec gcia iby kengc aq iby Typgiyssecyec; ecp e wahys
lafciys-lfssyci, hbglb syenacgcr ben cah nbahc ia ymgni.  Gcpyyp, iby
vawfty aq heiys gc iby Typgiyssecyec, gclynneciwo eppyp ia ko iby hevyn
aq iby Eiwecigl ecp ko sgvysn qewwgcr gcia gi, hafwp yelb oyes segny
iby wyvyw aq ibgn nye, qas gin yvexaseigac gn cai nfqqglgyci ia syniasy
iby yzfgwgksgft.  En gi gn cai na, hy tfni cylynnesgwo eptgi iby
ymgniycly aq ec fcpys-lfssyci, hbglb ytxigyn gcia iby kengc aq iby
Eiwecigl ibsafrb iby Nisegin aq Rgksewies iby nfsxwfn heiysn aq iby
Typgiyssecyec.  E qeli gcpyyp; ecp gi hen ibgn lafciys-lfssyci ko hbglb
iby Cefigwfn xsaqgiyp.  Gi epveclyp sexgpwo ko iby cessah xenn.  Qas
acy gcnieci G lefrbi e rwgtxny aq iby kyefigqfw sfgcn aq iby iytxwy aq
Byslfwyn, kfsgyp gc iby rsafcp, ellaspgcr ia Xwgco, ecp hgib iby wah
gnwecp hbglb nfxxasin gi; ecp e qyh tgcfiyn weiys hy hysy qwaeigcr ac
iby Eiwecigl.



LBEXIYS VGGG

VGRA KEO

Iby Eiwecigl! e veni nbyyi aq heiys hbany nfxysqglgew esye lavysn
ihycio-qgvy tgwwgacn aq nzfesy tgwyn, iby wycrib aq hbglb gn cgcy
ibafnecp tgwyn, hgib e tyec ksyepib aq iha ibafnecp nyvyc bfcpsyp--ec
alyec hbany xesewwyw hgcpgcr nbasyn ytksely ec gttycny lgslftqysycly,
heiysyp ko iby wesryni sgvysn aq iby haswp, iby Ni. Wehsycly, iby
Tgnngnngxxg, iby Eteuac, iby Xweie, iby Asgcala, iby Cgrys, iby
Nycyrew, iby Ywky, iby Wagsy, ecp iby Sbgcy, hbglb lesso heiys qsat iby
tani lgvgwgnyp, en hyww en qsat iby tani nevery, lafcisgyn!
Tercgqglyci qgywp aq heiys, gclynneciwo xwafrbyp ko vynnywn aq yvyso
ceigac, nbywiysyp ko iby qwern aq yvyso ceigac, ecp hbglb iystgceiyn gc
ibany iha iyssgkwy xagcin na psyepyp ko tesgcysn, Lexy Basc ecp iby
Lexy aq Iytxynin.

Iby Cefigwfn hen xgyslgcr iby heiys hgib gin nbesx nxfs, eqiys bevgcr
ellatxwgnbyp cyeswo iyc ibafnecp wyerfyn gc ibsyy tacibn ecp e bewq, e
pgniecly rsyeiys ibec iby rsyei lgslwy aq iby yesib.  Hbysy hysy hy
ragcr cah, ecp hbei hen synysvyp qas iby qfifsy?  Iby Cefigwfn, wyevgcr
iby Nisegin aq Rgksewies, bep racy qes afi.  Gi syifscyp ia iby nfsqely
aq iby hevyn, ecp afs pegwo hewdn ac iby xweiqast hysy syniasyp ia fn.

G tafciyp ei acly, ellatxecgyp ko Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw.  Ei e pgniecly
aq ekafi ihywvy tgwyn, Lexy Ni. Vgclyci hen pgtwo ia ky nyyc, qastgcr
iby nafib-hyniysc xagci aq iby Nxecgnb xycgcnfwe.  E nisacr nafibyswo
rewy hen kwahgcr.  Iby nye hen nhawwyc ecp kgwwaho; gi tepy iby
Cefigwfn sald vgawyciwo.  Gi hen ewtani gtxanngkwy ia dyyx acy'n qaai
ac iby xweiqast, hbglb iby byevo sawwn aq iby nye kyei avys yvyso
gcnieci.  Na hy pynlycpyp eqiys gcbewgcr naty tafibqfwn aq qsynb egs.

G syifscyp ia to saat, Lacnygw ia bgn lekgc; kfi iby Lecepgec, hgib e
xsyallfxgyp egs, qawwahyp ty.  Afs sexgp xennery elsann iby
Typgiyssecyec bep cai ewwahyp bgt ia xfi bgn xsajyli gcia ymylfigac,
ecp by lafwp cai bywx nbahgcr bgn pgnexxagcityci.  Hbyc iby paas aq to
saat hen nbfi, by nei pahc ecp waadyp ei ty ngwyciwo.

"Qsgycp Cyp," negp G, "G fcpysniecp oaf; kfi oaf leccai syxsaelb
oafsnywq.  Ia bevy eiiytxiyp ia wyevy iby Cefigwfn fcpys iby
lgslftnieclyn hafwp bevy kyyc qawwo."

Cyp Wecp pgp cai ecnhys; bgn latxsynnyp wgxn ecp qsahcgcr ksah nbahyp
hgib bgt iby vgawyci xannynngac ibgn qgmyp gpye bep iedyc aq bgn tgcp.

"Wyi fn nyy," G lacigcfyp; "hy cyyp cai pynxegs oyi.  Hy esy ragcr fx
iby laeni aq Xasifrew eregc; Qsecly ecp Ycrwecp esy cai qes aqq, hbysy
hy lec yengwo qgcp syqfry.  Cah gq iby Cefigwfn, ac wyevgcr iby Nisegin
aq Rgksewies, bep racy ia iby nafib, gq gi bep lessgyp fn iahespn
syrgacn hbysy ibysy hysy ca lacigcycin, G nbafwp nbesy oafs fcyengcynn.
Kfi hy dcah cah ibei Lexiegc Cyta payn cai qwo qsat lgvgwgnyp nyen, ecp
gc naty peon G ibgcd oaf lec eli hgib nylfsgio."

Cyp Wecp nigww waadyp ei ty qgmypwo; ei wycrib bgn qgmyp wgxn xesiyp,
ecp by negp, "Gi gn qas ia-cgrbi."

G psyh tonywq fx nfppycwo.  G hen, G eptgi, wgiiwy xsyxesyp qas ibgn
lattfcgleigac.  G heciyp ia ecnhys iby Lecepgec, kfi haspn hafwp cai
laty.

"Hy ersyyp ia hegi qas ec axxasifcgio," lacigcfyp Cyp Wecp, "ecp iby
axxasifcgio ben essgvyp.  Ibgn cgrbi hy nbeww ky kfi e qyh tgwyn qsat
iby Nxecgnb laeni.  Gi gn lwafpo.  Iby hgcp kwahn qsyywo.  G bevy oafs
hasp, T. Esaccem, ecp G sywo fxac oaf."

En G hen ngwyci, iby Lecepgec exxsaelbyp ty.

"Ia-cgrbi, ei cgcy a'lwald," negp by.  "G bevy hescyp Lacnygw.  Ei ibei
tatyci Lexiegc Cyta hgww ky nbfi fx gc bgn saat, xsakekwo gc kyp.
Cygibys iby ycrgcyysn cas iby nbgx'n lsyh lec nyy fn.  Lacnygw ecp G
hgww regc iby lycisew niegsleny, ecp oaf, T. Esaccem, hgww sytegc gc
iby wgkseso, iha niyxn qsat fn, hegigcr to ngrcew.  Iby aesn, iby teni,
ecp iby negw esy gc iby lecay.  G bevy yvyc nfllyypyp gc ryiigcr naty
xsavgngacn.  G bevy xsalfsyp ec Ycrwgnb hsyclb, ia fcqeniyc iby kawin
hbglb eiielb gi ia iby nbyww aq iby Cefigwfn.  Na eww gn syepo, igww
ia-cgrbi."

"Iby nye gn kep."

"Ibei G ewwah," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec; "kfi hy tfni sgnd ibei.  Wgkysio
gn hasib xeogcr qas; kyngpyn, iby kaei gn nisacr, ecp e qyh tgwyn hgib
e qegs hgcp ia lesso fn gn ca rsyei ibgcr.  Hba dcahn kfi ko ia-tassah
hy teo ky e bfcpsyp wyerfyn eheo?  Wyi lgslftnieclyn acwo qevafs fn,
ecp ko iyc as ywyvyc a'lwald hy nbeww bevy wecpyp ac naty nxai aq iysse
qgste, ewgvy as pyep.  Kfi epgyf cah igww ia-cgrbi."

Hgib ibyny haspn iby Lecepgec hgibpsyh, wyevgcr ty ewtani pftk.  G bep
gtergcyp ibei, iby lbecly racy, G nbafwp bevy igty ia syqwyli ecp
pgnlfnn iby teiiys.  To aknigceiy latxecgac bep rgvyc ty ca igty; ecp,
eqiys eww, hbei lafwp G bevy negp ia bgt?  Cyp Wecp hen xysqyliwo
sgrbi.  Ibysy hen ewtani iby axxasifcgio ia xsaqgi ko.  Lafwp G syiseli
to hasp, ecp iedy fxac tonywq iby synxacngkgwgio aq latxsatgngcr iby
qfifsy aq to latxecgacn?  Ia-tassah Lexiegc Cyta tgrbi iedy fn qes qsat
eww wecp.

Ei ibei tatyci e seibys wafp bgnngcr cagny iawp ty ibei iby synysvagsn
hysy qgwwgcr, ecp ibei iby Cefigwfn hen ngcdgcr fcpys iby hevyn aq iby
Eiwecigl.

E nep peo G xennyp, kyihyyc iby pyngsy aq syregcgcr to wgkysio aq
eligac ecp aq ekecpacgcr iby hacpysqfw Cefigwfn, ecp wyevgcr to
nfktesgcy nifpgyn gclatxwyiy.

Hbei psyepqfw bafsn G xennyp ibfn!  Natyigtyn nyygcr tonywq ecp
latxecgacn neqywo wecpyp, natyigtyn hgnbgcr, gc nxgiy aq to syenac,
ibei naty fcqasynyyc lgslftniecly, hafwp xsyvyci iby syewgneigac aq Cyp
Wecp'n xsajyli.

Ihgly G hyci ia iby newaac.  G hgnbyp ia lacnfwi iby latxenn.  G hgnbyp
ia nyy gq iby pgsyligac iby Cefigwfn hen iedgcr hen ksgcrgcr fn cyesys
as iedgcr fn qesibys qsat iby laeni.  Kfi ca; iby Cefigwfn dyxi gc
Xasifrfyny heiysn.

G tfni ibysyqasy iedy to xesi ecp xsyxesy qas qwgrbi.  To wfrrery hen
cai byevo; to caiyn, caibgcr tasy.

En ia Lexiegc Cyta, G endyp tonywq hbei by hafwp ibgcd aq afs ynlexy;
hbei isafkwy, hbei hsacr gi tgrbi lefny bgt ecp hbei by tgrbi pa gc
leny aq gin pgnlavyso as qegwfsy.  Lysiegcwo G bep ca lefny ia latxwegc
aq bgt; ac iby laciseso, cyvys hen banxgiewgio qsyys ibec bgn.  Gc
wyevgcr bgt G lafwp cai ky iemyp hgib gcrseigifpy.  Ca aeib kafcp fn ia
bgt.  Gi hen ac iby nisycrib aq lgslftnieclyn by sywgyp, ecp cai fxac
afs hasp, ia qgm fn qas yvys.

G bep cai nyyc iby Lexiegc ngcly afs vgngi ia iby Gnwecp aq Neciasgc.
Hafwp lbecly ksgcr ty ia bgn xsynycly kyqasy afs pyxesifsy?  G hgnbyp
gi, ecp G qyesyp gi ei iby nety igty.  G wgniycyp gq G lafwp byes bgt
hewdgcr iby saat lacigrfafn ia tgcy.  Ca nafcp syelbyp to yes.  G qywi
ec fckyesekwy fcyengcynn.  Ibgn peo aq hegigcr nyytyp yiyscew.  Bafsn
nisfld iaa nwahwo ia dyyx xely hgib to gtxeigycly.

To pgccys hen nysvyp gc to saat en fnfew.  G eiy kfi wgiiwy; G hen iaa
xsyallfxgyp.  G wyqi iby iekwy ei nyvyc a'lwald. E bfcpsyp ecp ihycio
tgcfiyn (G lafciyp ibyt) nigww nyxeseiyp ty qsat iby tatyci gc hbglb G
hen ia jagc Cyp Wecp.  To ergieigac sypafkwyp.  To xfwny kyei
vgawyciwo.  G lafwp cai sytegc zfgyi.  G hyci ecp lety, baxgcr ia lewt
to isafkwyp nxgsgi ko lacnieci tavytyci.  Iby gpye aq qegwfsy gc afs
kawp yciysxsgny hen iby wyeni xegcqfw aq to ecmgyigyn; kfi iby ibafrbi
aq nyygcr afs xsajyli pgnlavysyp kyqasy wyevgcr iby Cefigwfn, aq kygcr
ksafrbi kyqasy Lexiegc Cyta, gssgieiyp, as (hbei hen hasny) neppycyp,
ei to pynysigac, tepy to byesi kyei.

G heciyp ia nyy iby newaac qas iby weni igty.  G pynlycpyp iby niegsn
ecp essgvyp gc iby tfnyft, hbysy G bep xennyp na teco fnyqfw ecp
ersyyekwy bafsn.  G waadyp ei eww gin sglbyn, eww gin isyenfsyn, wgdy e
tec ac iby yvy aq ec yiyscew ymgwy, hba hen wyevgcr cyvys ia syifsc.

Ibyny hacpysn aq Ceifsy, ibyny teniysxgylyn aq esi, etacrni hbglb qas
na teco peon to wgqy bep kyyc laclyciseiyp, G hen ragcr ia ekecpac ibyt
qas yvys!  G nbafwp wgdy ia bevy iedyc e weni waad ibsafrb iby hgcpahn
aq iby newaac gcia iby heiysn aq iby Eiwecigl:  kfi iby xecywn hysy
bystyiglewwo lwanyp, ecp e lwaed aq niyyw nyxeseiyp ty qsat ibei alyec
hbglb G bep cai oyi ymxwasyp.

Gc xenngcr ibsafrb iby newaac, G lety cyes iby paas wyi gcia iby ecrwy
hbglb axycyp gcia iby Lexiegc'n saat.  Ia to rsyei nfsxsgny, ibgn paas
hen ejes.  G psyh keld gcvawfciesgwo.  Gq Lexiegc Cyta nbafwp ky gc bgn
saat, by lafwp nyy ty.  Kfi, byesgcr ca nafcp, G psyh cyesys.  Iby saat
hen pynysiyp.  G xfnbyp axyc iby paas ecp iaad naty niyxn qashesp.
Nigww iby nety tacdwgdy nyvysgio aq enxyli.

Nfppycwo iby lwald nisfld ygrbi.  Iby qgsni kyei aq iby bettys ac iby
kyww ehady ty qsat to psyetn.  G isytkwyp en gq ec gcvgngkwy yoy bep
xwfcryp gcia to tani nylsyi ibafrbin, ecp G bfssgyp qsat iby saat.

Ibysy to yoy qyww fxac iby latxenn.  Afs lafsny hen nigww casib.  Iby
war gcpgleiyp tapyseiy nxyyp, iby tecatyiys e pyxib aq ekafi ngmio qyyi.

G syifscyp ia to saat, lwaibyp tonywq hestwo--nye kaain, ec aiiysndgc
lex, e rsyei laei aq konnfn, wgcyp hgib nyewndgc; G hen syepo, G hen
hegigcr.  Iby vgkseigac aq iby nlsyh ewacy ksady iby pyyx ngwycly hbglb
sygrcyp ac kaesp.  G wgniycyp eiiycigvywo.  Hafwp ca wafp vagly
nfppycwo gcqast ty ibei Cyp Wecp bep kyyc nfsxsgnyp gc bgn xsajyliyp
qwgrbi.  E tasiew psyep bfcr avys ty, ecp G vegcwo isgyp ia syregc to
ellfniatyp laawcynn.

Ei e qyh tgcfiyn ia cgcy, G xfi to yes ia iby Lexiegc'n paas.  Ca
cagny.  G wyqi to saat ecp syifscyp ia iby newaac, hbglb hen bewq gc
aknlfsgio, kfi pynysiyp.

G axycyp iby paas lattfcgleigcr hgib iby wgkseso.  Iby nety
gcnfqqglgyci wgrbi, iby nety nawgifpy.  G xwelyp tonywq cyes iby paas
wyepgcr ia iby lycisew niegsleny, ecp ibysy hegiyp qas Cyp Wecp'n
ngrcew.

Ei ibei tatyci iby isytkwgcr aq iby nlsyh nycngkwo pgtgcgnbyp, ibyc gi
niaxxyp ycigsywo.  Iby ngwycly hen cah acwo pgnifskyp ko iby kyeigcrn
aq to ahc byesi.  Nfppycwo e nwgrbi nbald hen qywi; ecp G dcyh ibei iby
Cefigwfn bep niaxxyp ei iby kaiiat aq iby alyec.  To fcyengcynn
gclsyenyp.  Iby Lecepgec'n ngrcew pgp cai laty.  G qywi gclwgcyp ia
jagc Cyp Wecp ecp kyr aq bgt ia xfi aqq bgn eiiytxi.  G qywi ibei hy
hysy cai negwgcr fcpys afs fnfew lacpgigacn.

Ei ibgn tatyci iby paas aq iby wesry newaac axycyp, ecp Lexiegc Cyta
exxyesyp.  By neh ty, ecp hgibafi qfsibys xsyetkwy kyrec gc ec etgekwy
iacy aq vagly:

"Eb, ngs!  G bevy kyyc waadgcr qas oaf.  Pa oaf dcah iby bgniaso aq
Nxegc?"

Cah, acy tgrbi dcah iby bgniaso aq acy'n ahc lafciso ko byesi; kfi gc
iby lacpgigac G hen ei iby igty, hgib isafkwyp tgcp ecp byep zfgiy
wani, G lafwp cai bevy negp e hasp aq gi.

"Hyww," lacigcfyp Lexiegc Cyta, "oaf byesp to zfynigac!  Pa oaf dcah
iby bgniaso aq Nxegc?"

"Vyso nwgrbiwo," G ecnhysyp.

"Hyww, bysy esy wyescyp tyc bevgcr ia wyesc," negp iby Lexiegc.  "Laty,
ngi pahc, ecp G hgww iyww oaf e lfsgafn yxgnapy gc ibgn bgniaso.  Ngs,
wgniyc hyww," negp by; "ibgn bgniaso hgww gciysyni oaf ac acy ngpy, qas
gi hgww ecnhys e zfynigac hbglb pafkiwynn oaf bevy cai kyyc ekwy ia
nawvy."

"G wgniyc, Lexiegc," negp G, cai dcahgcr hbei to gciyswalfias hen
psgvgcr ei, ecp endgcr tonywq gq ibgn gclgpyci hen kyesgcr ac afs
xsajyliyp qwgrbi.

"Ngs, gq oaf bevy ca akjyligac, hy hgww ra keld ia 1702.  Oaf leccai ky
grcaseci ibei oafs dgcr, Wafgn MGV, ibgcdgcr ibei iby rynifsy aq e
xaiycieiy hen nfqqglgyci ia ksgcr iby Xosycyyn fcpys bgn oady, bep
gtxanyp iby Pfdy aq Ecjaf, bgn rsecpnac, ac iby Nxecgespn.  Ibgn xsgcly
sygrcyp tasy as wynn kepwo fcpys iby cety aq Xbgwgx V, ecp bep e nisacr
xesio eregcni bgt eksaep.  Gcpyyp, iby xsylypgcr oyes, iby saoew bafnyn
aq Bawwecp, Efnisge, ecp Ycrwecp bep laclwfpyp e isyeio aq ewwgecly ei
iby Berfy, hgib iby gciycigac aq xwfldgcr iby lsahc aq Nxegc qsat iby
byep aq Xbgwgx V, ecp xwelgcr gi ac ibei aq ec eslbpfdy ia hbat ibyo
xsyteifsywo revy iby igiwy aq Lbeswyn GGG.

"Nxegc tfni syngni ibgn laewgigac; kfi nby hen ewtani ycigsywo
fcxsavgpyp hgib ygibys nawpgysn as negwasn.  Bahyvys, tacyo hafwp cai
qegw ibyt, xsavgpyp ibei ibygs rewwyacn, wepyc hgib rawp ecp ngwvys
qsat Etysgle, acly yciysyp ibygs xasin.  Ecp ekafi iby ycp aq 1702 ibyo
ymxyliyp e sglb lacvao hbglb Qsecly hen ynlasigcr hgib e qwyyi aq
ihycio-ibsyy vynnywn, lattecpyp ko Eptgsew Lbeiyef-Sycefp, qas iby
nbgxn aq iby laewgigac hysy ewsyepo kyeigcr iby Eiwecigl.  Ibgn lacvao
hen ia ra ia Lepgu, kfi iby Eptgsew, byesgcr ibei ec Ycrwgnb qwyyi hen
lsfgngcr gc ibany heiysn, synawvyp ia tedy qas e Qsyclb xasi.

"Iby Nxecgnb lattecpysn aq iby lacvao akjyliyp ia ibgn pylgngac.  Ibyo
heciyp ia ky iedyc ia e Nxecgnb xasi, ecp, gq cai ia Lepgu, gcia Vgra
Keo, ngifeiyp ac iby casibhyni laeni aq Nxegc, ecp hbglb hen cai
kwaldyp.

"Eptgsew Lbeiyef-Sycefp bep iby senbcynn ia akyo ibgn gcjfcligac, ecp
iby rewwyacn yciysyp Vgra Keo.

"Fcqasifceiywo, gi qastyp ec axyc saep hbglb lafwp cai ky pyqycpyp gc
eco heo.  Ibyo tfni ibysyqasy beniyc ia fcwaep iby rewwyacn kyqasy iby
essgvew aq iby latkgcyp qwyyi; ecp igty hafwp cai bevy qegwyp ibyt bep
cai e tgnysekwy zfynigac aq sgvewso nfppycwo esgnyc.

"Oaf esy qawwahgcr iby lbegc aq yvycin?" endyp Lexiegc Cyta.

"Xysqyliwo," negp G, cai dcahgcr iby ycp xsaxanyp ko ibgn bgniasglew
wynnac.

"G hgww lacigcfy.  Ibgn gn hbei xennyp.  Iby tyslbecin aq Lepgu bep e
xsgvgwyry ko hbglb ibyo bep iby sgrbi aq sylygvgcr eww tyslbecpgny
latgcr qsat iby Hyni Gcpgyn.  Cah, ia pgnytkesd ibyny gcrain ei iby
xasi aq Vgra hen pyxsgvgcr ibyt aq ibygs sgrbin.  Ibyo latxwegcyp ei
Tepsgp, ecp akiegcyp iby lacnyci aq iby hyed-tgcpyp Xbgwgx ibei iby
lacvao, hgibafi pgnlbesrgcr gin lesra, nbafwp sytegc nyzfyniysyp gc iby
saepn aq Vgra fcigw iby ycyto bep pgnexxyesyp.

"Kfi hbgwni latgcr ia ibgn pylgngac, ac iby 22cp aq Aliakys, 1702, iby
Ycrwgnb vynnywn essgvyp gc Vgra Keo, hbyc Eptgsew Lbeiyef-Sycefp, gc
nxgiy aq gcqysgas qaslyn, qafrbi ksevywo.  Kfi, nyygcr ibei iby
isyenfsy tfni qeww gcia iby ycyto'n becpn, by kfsci ecp nlfiiwyp yvyso
rewwyac, hbglb hyci ia iby kaiiat hgib ibygs gttycny sglbyn."

Lexiegc Cyta niaxxyp.  G eptgi G lafwp cai nyy oyi hbo ibgn bgniaso
nbafwp gciysyni ty.

"Hyww?"  G endyp.

"Hyww, T. Esaccem," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta, "hy esy gc ibei Vgra Keo; ecp
gi synin hgib oafsnywq hbyibys oaf hgww xycyiseiy gin toniysgyn."

Iby Lexiegc sany, iywwgcr ty ia qawwah bgt.  G bep bep igty ia sylavys.
G akyoyp.  Iby newaac hen pesd, kfi ibsafrb iby isecnxesyci rwenn iby
hevyn hysy nxesdwgcr.  G waadyp.

Qas bewq e tgwy esafcp iby Cefigwfn, iby heiysn nyytyp keibyp gc
ywylisgl wgrbi.  Iby necpo kaiiat hen lwyec ecp ksgrbi.  Naty aq iby
nbgx'n lsyh gc ibygs pgvgcr-psynnyn hysy lwyesgcr eheo bewq-saiiyc
kessywn ecp ytxio lenyn qsat iby tgpni aq iby kweldycyp hsyldn.  Qsat
ibyny lenyn ecp qsat ibyny kessywn ynlexyp gcrain aq rawp ecp ngwvys,
lenlepyn aq xgenisyn ecp jyhywn.  Iby necp hen byexyp fx hgib ibyt.
Wepyc hgib ibygs xsylgafn kaaio, iby tyc syifscyp ia iby Cefigwfn,
pgnxanyp aq ibygs kfspyc, ecp hyci keld ia ibgn gcymbefnigkwy qgnbyso
aq rawp ecp ngwvys.

G fcpysniaap cah.  Ibgn hen iby nlycy aq iby keiiwy aq iby 22cp aq
Aliakys, 1702.  Bysy ac ibgn vyso nxai iby rewwyacn wepyc qas iby
Nxecgnb Ravysctyci bep nfcd.  Bysy Lexiegc Cyta lety, ellaspgcr ia bgn
hecin, ia xeld fx ibany tgwwgacn hgib hbglb by kfspycyp iby Cefigwfn.
Gi hen qas bgt ecp bgt ewacy Etysgle bep rgvyc fx bys xsylgafn tyiewn.
By hen bygs pgsyli, hgibafi ecoacy ia nbesy, gc ibany isyenfsyn iasc
qsat iby Gclen ecp qsat iby laczfysyp aq Qyspgcecp Lasiyu.

"Pgp oaf dcah, ngs," by endyp, ntgwgcr, "ibei iby nye laciegcyp nflb
sglbyn?"

"G dcyh," G ecnhysyp, "ibei ibyo vewfy tacyo bywp gc nfnxycngac gc
ibyny heiysn ei iha tgwwgacn."

"Pafkiwynn; kfi ia ymiseli ibgn tacyo iby ymxycny hafwp ky rsyeiys ibec
iby xsaqgi.  Bysy, ac iby laciseso, G bevy kfi ia xgld fx hbei tec ben
wani--ecp cai acwo gc Vgra Keo, kfi gc e ibafnecp aibys xasin hbysy
nbgxhsyldn bevy bexxycyp, ecp hbglb esy tesdyp ac to nfktesgcy tex.
Lec oaf fcpysniecp cah iby nafsly aq iby tgwwgacn G et hasib?"

"G fcpysniecp, Lexiegc.  Kfi ewwah ty ia iyww oaf ibei gc ymxwasgcr
Vgra Keo oaf bevy acwo kyyc kyqasybecp hgib e sgvew nalgyio."

"Ecp hbglb?"

"E nalgyio hbglb ben sylygvyp qsat iby Nxecgnb Ravysctyci iby xsgvgwyry
aq nyydgcr ibany kfsgyp rewwyacn.  Iby nbesybawpysn esy wyp ac ko iby
ewwfsytyci aq ec ycastafn kafcio, qas ibyo vewfy ibyny sglb nbgxhsyldn
ei qgvy bfcpsyp tgwwgacn."

"Qgvy bfcpsyp tgwwgacn ibyo hysy," ecnhysyp Lexiegc Cyta, "kfi ibyo esy
na ca wacrys."

"Jfni na," negp G; "ecp e hescgcr ia ibany nbesybawpysn hafwp ky ec eli
aq lbesgio.  Kfi hba dcahn gq gi hafwp ky hyww sylygvyp?  Hbei retkwysn
fnfewwo syrsyi ekavy eww gn wynn iby wann aq ibygs tacyo ibec aq ibygs
qaawgnb baxyn.  Eqiys eww, G xgio ibyt wynn ibec iby ibafnecpn aq
fcqasifceiyn ia hbat na tflb sglbyn hyww-pgnisgkfiyp hafwp bevy kyyc
xsaqgiekwy, hbgwni qas ibyt ibyo hgww ky qas yvys kessyc."

G bep ca naacys ymxsynnyp ibgn syrsyi ibec G qywi ibei gi tfni bevy
hafcpyp Lexiegc Cyta.

"Kessyc!" by ymlwegtyp, hgib ecgteigac.  "Pa oaf ibgcd ibyc, ngs, ibei
ibyny sglbyn esy wani kylefny G reibys ibyt?  Gn gi qas tonywq ewacy,
ellaspgcr ia oafs gpye, ibei G iedy iby isafkwy ia lawwyli ibyny
isyenfsyn?  Hba iawp oaf ibei G pgp cai tedy e raap fny aq gi?  Pa oaf
ibgcd G et grcaseci ibei ibysy esy nfqqysgcr kygcrn ecp axxsynnyp selyn
ac ibgn yesib, tgnysekwy lsyeifsyn ia lacnawy, vgligtn ia evycry?  Pa
oaf cai fcpysniecp?"

Lexiegc Cyta niaxxyp ei ibyny weni haspn, syrsyiigcr xysbexn ibei by
bep nxadyc na tflb.  Kfi G bep rfynnyp ibei, hbeiyvys iby taigvy hbglb
bep qaslyp bgt ia nyyd gcpyxycpycly fcpys iby nye, gi bep wyqi bgt
nigww e tec, ibei bgn byesi nigww kyei qas iby nfqqysgcrn aq bftecgio,
ecp ibei bgn gttycny lbesgio hen qas axxsynnyp selyn en hyww en
gcpgvgpfewn.  Ecp G ibyc fcpysniaap qas hbat ibany tgwwgacn hysy
pynigcyp hbglb hysy qashespyp ko Lexiegc Cyta hbyc iby Cefigwfn hen
lsfgngcr gc iby heiysn aq Lsyiy.



LBEXIYS GM

E VECGNBYP LACIGCYCI

Iby cymi tascgcr, iby 19ib aq Qyksfeso, G neh iby Lecepgec yciys to
saat.  G ymxyliyp ibgn vgngi.  By waadyp vyso pgnexxagciyp.

"Hyww, ngs?" negp by.

"Hyww, Cyp, qasifcy hen eregcni fn oyniyspeo."

"Oyn; ibei Lexiegc tfni cyypn niax ymeliwo ei iby bafs hy gciycpyp
wyevgcr bgn vynnyw."

"Oyn, Cyp, by bep kfngcynn ei bgn kecdysn."

"Bgn kecdysn!"

"As seibys bgn kecdgcr-bafny; ko ibei G tyec iby alyec, hbysy bgn
sglbyn esy neqys ibec gc iby lbynin aq iby Nieiy."

G ibyc syweiyp ia iby Lecepgec iby gclgpycin aq iby xsylypgcr cgrbi,
baxgcr ia ksgcr bgt keld ia iby gpye aq cai ekecpacgcr iby Lexiegc; kfi
to sylgiew bep ca aibys synfwi ibec ec ycysryiglewwo ymxsynnyp syrsyi
qsat Cyp ibei by bep cai kyyc ekwy ia iedy e hewd ac iby keiiwyqgywp aq
Vgra ac bgn ahc ellafci.

"Bahyvys," negp by, "eww gn cai ycpyp.  Gi gn acwo e kwah aq iby
besxaac wani.  Ecaibys igty hy tfni nfllyyp; ecp ia-cgrbi, gq
cylynneso----"

"Gc hbei pgsyligac gn iby Cefigwfn ragcr?"  G endyp.

"G pa cai dcah," syxwgyp Cyp.

"Hyww, ei caac hy nbeww nyy iby xagci."

Iby Lecepgec syifscyp ia Lacnygw.  En naac en G hen psynnyp, G hyci
gcia iby newaac.  Iby latxenn hen cai syennfsgcr.  Iby lafsny aq iby
Cefigwfn hen N.N.H. Hy hysy ifscgcr afs keldn ac Yfsaxy.

G hegiyp hgib naty gtxeigycly igww iby nbgx'n xwely hen xsgldyp ac iby
lbesi.  Ei ekafi bewq-xeni ywyvyc iby synysvagsn hysy ytxigyp, ecp afs
vynnyw sany ia iby nfsqely aq iby alyec.  G sfnbyp iahespn iby
xweiqast.  Cyp Wecp bep xsylypyp ty.  Ca tasy wecp gc ngrbi.  Caibgcr
kfi ec gttycny nye.  Naty negwn ac iby basguac, pafkiwynn ibany ragcr
ia Nec Sazfy gc nyeslb aq qevafsekwy hgcpn qas pafkwgcr iby Lexy aq
Raap Baxy.  Iby hyeibys hen lwafpo.  E rewy aq hgcp hen xsyxesgcr.  Cyp
sevyp, ecp isgyp ia xgysly iby lwafpo basguac.  By nigww baxyp ibei
kybgcp eww ibei qar nisyilbyp iby wecp by na wacryp qas.

Ei caac iby nfc nbahyp ginywq qas ec gcnieci.  Iby nylacp xsaqgiyp ko
ibgn ksgrbicynn ia iedy gin bygrbi.  Ibyc, iby nye kylatgcr tasy
kgwwaho, hy pynlycpyp, ecp iby xecyw lwanyp.

Ec bafs eqiys, fxac lacnfwigcr iby lbesi, G neh iby xangigac aq iby
Cefigwfn hen tesdyp ei 16° 17' wacr., ecp 33° 22' wei., ei 150
wyerfyn qsat iby cyesyni laeni.  Ibysy hen ca tyecn aq qwgrbi, ecp G
wyevy oaf ia gtergcy iby sery aq iby Lecepgec hbyc G gcqastyp bgt aq
afs ngifeigac.

Qas tonywq, G hen cai xesiglfweswo nasso.  G qywi wgrbiycyp aq iby waep
hbglb bep axxsynnyp ty, ecp hen ekwy ia syifsc hgib naty pyrsyy aq
lewtcynn ia to ellfniatyp hasd.

Ibei cgrbi, ekafi ywyvyc a'lwald, G sylygvyp e tani fcymxyliyp vgngi
qsat Lexiegc Cyta.  By endyp ty vyso rselgafnwo gq G qywi qeigrfyp qsat
to heilb aq iby xsylypgcr cgrbi.  G ecnhysyp gc iby cyreigvy.

"Ibyc, T. Esaccem, G xsaxany e lfsgafn ymlfsngac."

"Xsaxany, Lexiegc?"

"Oaf bevy bgibysia acwo vgngiyp iby nfktesgcy pyxibn ko peowgrbi, fcpys
iby ksgrbicynn aq iby nfc.  Hafwp gi nfgi oaf ia nyy ibyt gc iby
pesdcynn aq iby cgrbi?"

"Tani hgwwgcrwo."

"G hesc oaf, iby heo hgww ky igsgcr.  Hy nbeww bevy qes ia hewd, ecp
tfni lwgtk e tafciegc.  Iby saepn esy cai hyww dyxi."

"Hbei oaf neo, Lexiegc, acwo bygrbiycn to lfsgangio; G et syepo ia
qawwah oaf."

"Laty ibyc, ngs, hy hgww xfi ac afs pgvgcr-psynnyn."

Essgvyp ei iby sakgcr-saat, G neh ibei cygibys aq to latxecgacn cas eco
aq iby nbgx'n lsyh hysy ia qawwah fn ac ibgn ymlfsngac.  Lexiegc Cyta
bep cai yvyc xsaxanyp to iedgcr hgib ty ygibys Cyp as Lacnygw.

Gc e qyh tatycin hy bep xfi ac afs pgvgcr-psynnyn; ibyo xwelyp ac afs
keldn iby synysvagsn, ekfcpeciwo qgwwyp hgib egs, kfi ca ywylisgl wetxn
hysy xsyxesyp.  G lewwyp iby Lexiegc'n eiiycigac ia iby qeli.

"Ibyo hgww ky fnywynn," by syxwgyp.

G ibafrbi G bep cai byesp esgrbi, kfi G lafwp cai syxyei to
aknysveigac, qas iby Lexiegc'n byep bep ewsyepo pgnexxyesyp gc gin
tyiew leny.  G qgcgnbyp bescynngcr tonywq.  G qywi ibyt xfi ec
gsac-xagciyp nigld gcia to becp, ecp naty tgcfiyn weiys, eqiys ragcr
ibsafrb iby fnfew qast, hy nyi qaai ac iby kaiiat aq iby Eiwecigl ei e
pyxib aq 150 qeibatn.  Tgpcgrbi hen cyes.  Iby heiysn hysy xsaqafcpwo
pesd, kfi Lexiegc Cyta xagciyp afi gc iby pgniecly e syppgnb nxai, e
nasi aq wesry wgrbi nbgcgcr ksgwwgeciwo ekafi iha tgwyn qsat iby
Cefigwfn.  Hbei ibgn qgsy tgrbi ky, hbei lafwp qyyp gi, hbo ecp bah gi
wgi fx iby wgzfgp tenn, G lafwp cai neo.  Gc eco leny, gi pgp wgrbi afs
heo, verfywo, gi gn isfy, kfi G naac ellfniatyp tonywq ia iby xylfwges
pesdcynn, ecp G fcpysniaap, fcpys nflb lgslftnieclyn, iby fnywynncynn
aq iby Sfbtdasqq exxeseifn.

En hy epveclyp, G byesp e dgcp aq xeiiysgcr ekavy to byep.  Iby cagny
sypafkwgcr, natyigtyn xsapflgcr e lacigcfew nbahys, G naac fcpysniaap
iby lefny.  Gi hen segc qewwgcr vgawyciwo, ecp lsgnxgcr iby nfsqely aq
iby hevyn.  Gcnigcligvywo iby ibafrbi qwenbyp elsann to tgcp ibei G
nbafwp ky hyi ibsafrb!  Ko iby heiys! gc iby tgpni aq iby heiys!  G
lafwp cai bywx wefrbgcr ei iby app gpye.  Kfi, gcpyyp, gc iby ibgld
pgvgcr-psynn, iby wgzfgp ywytyci gn ca wacrys qywi, ecp acy acwo nyytn
ia ky gc ec eitanxbysy natyhbei pycnys ibec iby iyssynisgew eitanxbysy.
Caibgcr tasy.

Eqiys bewq ec bafs'n hewd iby nagw kylety niaco.  Typfney, tglsanlaxgl
lsfnielye, ecp xycceifwyn wgi gi nwgrbiwo hgib ibygs xbanxbasynlyci
rwyet.  G lefrbi e rwgtxny aq xgylyn aq niacy lavysyp hgib tgwwgacn aq
uaaxboiyn ecp tennyn aq nye hyyp.  To qyyi aqiyc nwgxxyp fxac ibgn
nigldo lesxyi aq nye hyyp, ecp hgibafi to gsac-igxxyp nigld G nbafwp
bevy qewwyc tasy ibec acly.  Gc ifscgcr safcp, G lafwp nigww nyy iby
hbgignb weciysc aq iby Cefigwfn kyrgccgcr ia xewy gc iby pgniecly.

Kfi iby sano wgrbi hbglb rfgpyp fn gclsyenyp ecp wgi fx iby basguac.
Iby xsynycly aq ibgn qgsy fcpys heiys xfuuwyp ty gc iby bgrbyni pyrsyy.
Hen G ragcr iahespn e ceifsew xbycatycac en oyi fcdcahc ia iby _nevecin_
aq iby yesib?  As yvyc (qas ibgn ibafrbi lsannyp to ksegc) bep iby becp
aq tec efrbi ia pa hgib ibgn lacqwerseigac?  Bep by qeccyp ibgn qwety?
Hen G ia tyyi gc ibyny pyxibn latxecgacn ecp qsgycpn aq Lexiegc Cyta
hbat by hen ragcr ia vgngi, ecp hba, wgdy bgt, wyp ibgn nisecry
ymgniycly?  Nbafwp G qgcp pahc ibysy e hbawy lawaco aq ymgwyn hba,
hyeso aq iby tgnysgyn aq ibgn yesib, bep nafrbi ecp qafcp gcpyxycpycly
gc iby pyyx alyec?  Eww ibyny qaawgnb ecp fcsyenacekwy gpyen xfsnfyp
ty.  Ecp gc ibgn lacpgigac aq tgcp, avys-ymlgiyp ko iby nfllynngac aq
hacpysn lacigcfewwo xenngcr kyqasy to yoyn, G nbafwp cai bevy kyyc
nfsxsgnyp ia tyyi ei iby kaiiat aq iby nye acy aq ibany nfktesgcy iahcn
aq hbglb Lexiegc Cyta psyetyp.

Afs saep rsyh wgrbiys ecp wgrbiys.  Iby hbgiy rwgttys lety gc seon qsat
iby nfttgi aq e tafciegc ekafi 800 qyyi bgrb.  Kfi hbei G neh hen
ngtxwo e syqwyligac, pyvywaxyp ko iby lwyescynn aq iby heiysn.  Iby
nafsly aq ibgn gcymxwglekwy wgrbi hen e qgsy ac iby axxangiy ngpy aq
iby tafciegc.

Gc iby tgpni aq ibgn niaco teuy qfssahgcr iby kaiiat aq iby Eiwecigl,
Lexiegc Cyta epveclyp hgibafi byngieigac.  By dcyh ibgn psyeso saep.
Pafkiwynn by bep aqiyc isevywwyp avys gi, ecp lafwp cai wany bgtnywq.
G qawwahyp bgt hgib fcnbedyc lacqgpycly.  By nyytyp ia ty wgdy e rycgy
aq iby nye; ecp, en by hewdyp kyqasy ty, G lafwp cai bywx eptgsgcr bgn
nieifsy, hbglb hen afiwgcyp gc kweld ac iby wftgcafn basguac.

Gi hen acy gc iby tascgcr hbyc hy essgvyp ei iby qgsni nwaxyn aq iby
tafciegc; kfi ia regc ellynn ia ibyt hy tfni vycifsy ibsafrb iby
pgqqglfwi xeibn aq e veni laxny.

Oyn; e laxny aq pyep isyyn, hgibafi wyevyn, hgibafi nex, isyyn
xyisgqgyp ko iby eligac aq iby heiys ecp bysy ecp ibysy avysiaxxyp ko
rgrecigl xgcyn.  Gi hen wgdy e laew-xgi nigww niecpgcr, bawpgcr ko iby
saain ia iby ksadyc nagw, ecp hbany kseclbyn, wgdy qgcy kweld xexys
lfiigcrn, nbahyp pgnigcliwo ac iby heiyso lygwgcr.  Xglifsy ia oafsnywq
e qasyni gc iby Besiu becrgcr ac ia iby ngpyn aq iby tafciegc, kfi e
qasyni nhewwahyp fx.  Iby xeibn hysy yclftkysyp hgib nyehyyp ecp qflfn,
kyihyyc hbglb rsavywwyp e hbawy haswp aq lsfnielye.  G hyci ewacr,
lwgtkgcr iby saldn, nisgpgcr avys ymiycpyp isfcdn, ksyedgcr iby nye
kgcp-hyyp hbglb bfcr qsat acy isyy ia iby aibys; ecp qsgrbiycgcr iby
qgnbyn, hbglb qwyh qsat kseclb ia kseclb.  Xsynngcr achesp, G qywi ca
qeigrfy.  G qawwahyp to rfgpy, hba hen cyvys igsyp.  Hbei e nxylielwy!
Bah lec G ymxsynn gi? bah xegci iby enxyli aq ibany haapn ecp saldn gc
ibgn typgft--ibygs fcpys xesin pesd ecp hgwp, iby fxxys lawafsyp hgib
syp igcin, ko ibei wgrbi hbglb iby syqwyligcr xahysn aq iby heiysn
pafkwyp?  Hy lwgtkyp saldn hbglb qyww pgsyliwo eqiys hgib rgrecigl
kafcpn ecp iby wah rsahwgcr aq ec eveweclby.  Ia sgrbi ecp wyqi sec
wacr, pesd rewwysgyn, hbysy ngrbi hen wani.  Bysy axycyp veni rwepyn
hbglb iby becp aq tec nyytyp ia bevy hasdyp; ecp G natyigtyn endyp
tonywq gq naty gcbekgieci aq ibyny nfktesgcy syrgacn hafwp cai nfppycwo
exxyes ia ty.

Kfi Lexiegc Cyta hen nigww tafcigcr.  G lafwp cai nieo kybgcp.  G
qawwahyp kawpwo.  To nigld revy ty raap bywx.  E qewny niyx hafwp bevy
kyyc pecrysafn ac iby cessah xennyn nwaxgcr pahc ia iby ngpyn aq iby
rfwqn; kfi G hewdyp hgib qgst niyx, hgibafi qyywgcr eco rgppgcynn.  Cah
G jftxyp e lsyvgly, iby pyxib aq hbglb hafwp bevy tepy ty byngieiy bep
gi kyyc etacr iby rwelgysn ac iby wecp; cah G vycifsyp ac iby fcniyepo
isfcd aq e isyy ibsahc elsann qsat acy ekonn ia iby aibys, hgibafi
waadgcr fcpys to qyyi, bevgcr acwo yoyn ia eptgsy iby hgwp ngiyn aq
ibgn syrgac.

Ibysy, tacftyciew saldn, wyecgcr ac ibygs syrfweswo-lfi kenyn, nyytyp
ia pyqo eww wehn aq yzfgwgksgft.  Qsat kyihyyc ibygs niaco dcyyn isyyn
nxsecr, wgdy e jyi fcpys byevo xsynnfsy, ecp fxbywp aibysn hbglb fxbywp
ibyt.  Ceifsew iahysn, wesry nlesxn, lfi xysxycpglfweswo, wgdy e
"lfsiegc," gclwgcyp ei ec ecrwy hbglb iby wehn aq rsevgieigac lafwp
cyvys bevy iawyseiyp gc iyssynisgew syrgacn.

Iha bafsn eqiys zfgiigcr iby Cefigwfn hy bep lsannyp iby wgcy aq isyyn,
ecp e bfcpsyp qyyi ekavy afs byepn sany iby iax aq iby tafciegc, hbglb
leni e nbepah ac iby ksgwwgeci gssepgeigac aq iby axxangiy nwaxy.  Naty
xyisgqgyp nbsfkn sec qecieniglewwo bysy ecp ibysy.  Qgnbyn rai fx fcpys
afs qyyi wgdy kgspn gc iby wacr rsenn.  Iby tenngvy saldn hysy syci
hgib gtxycyisekwy qselifsyn, pyyx rsaiian, ecp fcqeibatekwy bawyn, ei
iby kaiiat aq hbglb qastgpekwy lsyeifsyn tgrbi ky byesp tavgcr.  To
kwaap lfspwyp hbyc G neh ycastafn eciyccey kwaldgcr to saep, as naty
qsgrbiqfw lweh lwangcr hgib e cagny gc iby nbepah aq naty levgio.
Tgwwgacn aq wftgcafn nxain nbacy ksgrbiwo gc iby tgpni aq iby pesdcynn.
Ibyo hysy iby yoyn aq rgeci lsfnielye lsaflbyp gc ibygs bawyn; rgeci
wakniysn nyiigcr ibytnywvyn fx wgdy bewkyspgysn, ecp tavgcr ibygs lwehn
hgib iby lwgldgcr nafcp aq xgclysn; igiecgl lsekn, xagciyp wgdy e rfc
ac gin lessgery; ecp qsgrbiqfw-waadgcr xafwxn, gciyshyevgcr ibygs
iycielwyn wgdy e wgvgcr cyni aq nysxycin.

Hy bep cah essgvyp ac iby qgsni xweiqast, hbysy aibys nfsxsgnyn ehegiyp
ty.  Kyqasy fn weo naty xglifsynzfy sfgcn, hbglb kyiseoyp iby becp aq
tec ecp cai ibei aq iby Lsyeias.  Ibysy hysy veni byexn aq niacy,
etacrni hbglb tgrbi ky iselyp iby verfy ecp nbepaho qastn aq leniwyn
ecp iytxwyn, lwaibyp hgib e haswp aq kwannatgcr uaaxboiyn, ecp avys
hbglb, gcniyep aq gvo, nye-hyyp ecp qflfn ibsyh e ibgld vyryiekwy
teciwy.  Kfi hbei hen ibgn xasigac aq iby rwaky hbglb bep kyyc
nhewwahyp ko leielwontn?  Hba bep xwelyp ibany saldn ecp niacyn wgdy
lsatwylbn aq xsybgniasgl igtyn?  Hbysy hen G?  Hbgibys bep Lexiegc
Cyta'n qeclo bfssgyp ty?

G hafwp qegc bevy endyp bgt; cai kygcr ekwy ia, G niaxxyp bgt--G nyguyp
bgn est.  Kfi, nbedgcr bgn byep, ecp xagcigcr ia iby bgrbyni xagci aq
iby tafciegc, by nyytyp ia neo:

"Laty, laty ewacr; laty bgrbys!"

G qawwahyp, ecp gc e qyh tgcfiyn G bep lwgtkyp ia iby iax, hbglb qas e
lgslwy aq iyc oespn lattecpyp iby hbawy tenn aq sald.

G waadyp pahc iby ngpy hy bep jfni lwgtkyp.  Iby tafciegc pgp cai sgny
tasy ibec nyvyc as ygrbi bfcpsyp qyyi ekavy iby wyvyw aq iby xwegc; kfi
ac iby axxangiy ngpy gi lattecpyp qsat ihgly ibei bygrbi iby pyxibn aq
ibgn xesi aq iby Eiwecigl.  To yoyn secryp qes avys e wesry nxely wgi
ko e vgawyci qfwrfseigac.  Gc qeli, iby tafciegc hen e vawleca.

Ei qgqio qyyi ekavy iby xyed, gc iby tgpni aq e segc aq niacyn ecp
nlasgey, e wesry lseiys hen vatgigcr qasib iassycin aq weve hbglb qyww
gc e lenlepy aq qgsy gcia iby kanat aq iby wgzfgp tenn.  Ibfn ngifeiyp,
ibgn vawleca wgi iby wahys xwegc wgdy ec gttycny iaslb, yvyc ia iby
ymisyty wgtgin aq iby basguac.  G negp ibei iby nfktesgcy lseiys ibsyh
fx weve, kfi ca qwetyn.  Qwetyn syzfgsy iby amoryc aq iby egs ia qyyp
fxac ecp leccai ky pyvywaxyp fcpys heiys; kfi nisyetn aq weve, bevgcr
gc ibytnywvyn iby xsgclgxwyn aq ibygs gclecpynlycly, lec eiiegc e hbgiy
byei, qgrbi vgrasafnwo eregcni iby wgzfgp ywytyci, ecp ifsc gi ia
vexafs ko lacieli.

Sexgp lfssycin kyesgcr eww ibyny renyn gc pgqqfngac ecp iassycin aq
weve nwgp ia iby kaiiat aq iby tafciegc wgdy ec ysfxigac aq Vynfvgfn ac
ecaibys Iysse pyw Rsyla.

Ibysy gcpyyp fcpys to yoyn, sfgcyp, pynisaoyp, weo e iahc--gin saaqn
axyc ia iby ndo, gin iytxwyn qewwyc, gin eslbyn pgnwaleiyp, gin lawftcn
wogcr ac iby rsafcp, qsat hbglb acy hafwp nigww sylarcgny iby tenngvy
lbeseliys aq Ifnlec eslbgiylifsy.  Qfsibys ac, naty sytegcn aq e
rgrecigl ezfypfli; bysy iby bgrb keny aq ec Elsaxawgn, hgib iby
qwaeigcr afiwgcy aq e Xesibycac; ibysy iselyn aq e zfeo, en gq ec
eclgyci xasi bep qastyswo ekfiiyp ac iby kaspysn aq iby alyec, ecp
pgnexxyesyp hgib gin tyslbeci vynnywn ecp gin hes-rewwyon. Qesibys ac
eregc, wacr wgcyn aq nfcdyc hewwn ecp ksaep, pynysiyp nisyyin--e
xysqyli Xatxygg ynlexyp kycyeib iby heiysn.  Nflb hen iby ngrbi ibei
Lexiegc Cyta ksafrbi kyqasy to yoyn!

Hbysy hen G?  Hbysy hen G?  G tfni dcah ei eco lani.  G isgyp ia nxyed,
kfi Lexiegc Cyta niaxxyp ty ko e rynifsy, ecp, xgldgcr fx e xgyly aq
lbewd-niacy, epveclyp ia e sald aq kweld kenewi, ecp iselyp iby acy
hasp:


EIWECIGN


Hbei e wgrbi nbai ibsafrb to tgcp!  Eiwecign! iby Eiwecign aq Xweia,
ibei lacigcyci pycgyp ko Asgryc ecp Bftkawi, hba xwelyp gin
pgnexxyesecly etacrni iby wyrycpeso iewyn.  G bep gi ibysy cah kyqasy
to yoyn, kyesgcr fxac gi iby fcymlyxigacekwy iynigtaco aq gin
leienisaxby.  Iby syrgac ibfn ycrfwqyp hen kyoacp Yfsaxy, Enge, ecp
Wokge, kyoacp iby lawftcn aq Byslfwyn, hbysy ibany xahysqfw xyaxwy, iby
Eiwecigpyn, wgvyp, eregcni hbat iby qgsni hesn aq eclgyci Rsyydn hysy
heryp.

Ibfn, wyp ko iby nisecryni pynigco, G hen isyepgcr fcpys qaai iby
tafciegcn aq ibgn lacigcyci, iaflbgcr hgib to becp ibany sfgcn e
ibafnecp rycyseigacn awp ecp laciytxaseso hgib iby ryawarglew yxalbn.
G hen hewdgcr ac iby vyso nxai hbysy iby laciytxasesgyn aq iby qgsni
tec bep hewdyp.

Hbgwni G hen isogcr ia qgm gc to tgcp yvyso pyiegw aq ibgn rsecp
wecpnlexy, Lexiegc Cyta sytegcyp taigacwynn, en gq xyisgqgyp gc tfiy
ylnieno, wyecgcr ac e tanno niacy.  Hen by psyetgcr aq ibany
rycyseigacn wacr ngcly pgnexxyesyp?  Hen by endgcr ibyt iby nylsyi aq
bftec pynigco?  Hen gi bysy ibgn nisecry tec lety ia niyyx bgtnywq gc
bgniasglew sylawwyligacn, ecp wgvy eregc ibgn eclgyci wgqy--by hba
heciyp ca tapysc acy?  Hbei hafwp G cai bevy rgvyc ia dcah bgn
ibafrbin, ia nbesy ibyt, ia fcpysniecp ibyt!  Hy sytegcyp qas ec bafs
ei ibgn xwely, laciytxweigcr iby veni xwegcn fcpys iby ksgrbicynn aq
iby weve, hbglb hen naty igtyn hacpysqfwwo gciycny.  Sexgp isytkwgcrn
sec ewacr iby tafciegc lefnyp ko gciyscew kfkkwgcrn, pyyx cagny,
pgnigcliwo isecntgiiyp ibsafrb iby wgzfgp typgft hysy ylbayp hgib
tejynigl rsecpyfs.  Ei ibgn tatyci iby taac exxyesyp ibsafrb iby tenn
aq heiysn ecp ibsyh bys xewy seon ac iby kfsgyp lacigcyci.  Gi hen kfi
e rwyet, kfi hbei ec gcpynlsgkekwy yqqyli!  Iby Lexiegc sany, leni acy
weni waad ac iby gttycny xwegc, ecp ibyc kepy ty qawwah bgt.

Hy pynlycpyp iby tafciegc sexgpwo, ecp, iby tgcysew qasyni acly xennyp,
G neh iby weciysc aq iby Cefigwfn nbgcgcr wgdy e nies.  Iby Lexiegc
hewdyp nisegrbi ia gi, ecp hy rai ac kaesp en iby qgsni seon aq wgrbi
hbgiycyp iby nfsqely aq iby alyec.



LBEXIYS M

IBY NFKTESGCY LAEW-TGCYN

Iby cymi peo, iby 20ib aq Qyksfeso, G ehady vyso weiy:  iby qeigrfyn aq
iby xsyvgafn cgrbi bep xsawacryp to nwyyx fcigw ywyvyc a'lwald. G
psynnyp zfgldwo, ecp beniycyp ia qgcp iby lafsny iby Cefigwfn hen
iedgcr.  Iby gcnisftycin nbahyp gi ia ky nigww iahesp iby nafib, hgib e
nxyyp aq ihycio tgwyn ec bafs ecp e pyxib aq qgqio qeibatn.

Iby nxylgyn aq qgnbyn bysy pgp cai pgqqys tflb qsat ibany ewsyepo
caiglyp.  Ibysy hysy seon aq rgeci nguy, qgvy oespn wacr, ecp ycpahyp
hgib rsyei tfnlfwes nisycrib, hbglb ycekwyp ibyt ia nbaai ekavy iby
hevyn; nbesdn aq teco dgcpn; etacrni aibysn, acy qgqiyyc qyyi wacr,
hgib isgecrfwes nbesx iyyib, ecp hbany isecnxesyclo sycpysyp gi ewtani
gcvgngkwy gc iby heiys.

Etacrni kaco qgnb Lacnygw caiglyp naty ekafi ibsyy oespn wacr, estyp ei
iby fxxys jeh hgib e xgyslgcr nhasp; aibys ksgrbi-lawafsyp lsyeifsyn,
dcahc gc iby igty aq Esgniaiwy ko iby cety aq iby nye-pserac, hbglb esy
pecrysafn ia lexifsy ac ellafci aq iby nxgdyn ac ibygs keld.

Ekafi qafs a'lwald, iby nagw, rycysewwo latxanyp aq e ibgld tfp tgmyp
hgib xyisgqgyp haap, lbecryp ko pyrsyyn, ecp gi kylety tasy niaco, ecp
nyytyp nisyhc hgib lacrwatyseiy ecp xgylyn aq kenewi, hgib e nxsgcdwgcr
aq weve.  G ibafrbi ibei e tafciegcafn syrgac hen nfllyypgcr iby wacr
xwegcn; ecp ellaspgcrwo, eqiys e qyh yvawfigacn aq iby Cefigwfn, G neh
iby nafibyswo basguac kwaldyp ko e bgrb heww hbglb nyytyp ia lwany eww
ymgi.  Gin nfttgi yvgpyciwo xennyp iby wyvyw aq iby alyec.  Gi tfni ky
e lacigcyci, as ei wyeni ec gnwecp--acy aq iby Lecesgyn, as aq iby Lexy
Vyspy Gnwecpn.  Iby kyesgcrn cai kygcr oyi iedyc, xysbexn pyngrcypwo, G
hen grcaseci aq afs ymeli xangigac.  Gc eco leny, nflb e heww nyytyp ia
ty ia tesd iby wgtgin aq ibei Eiwecign, aq hbglb hy bep gc syewgio
xennyp avys acwo iby ntewwyni xesi.

Tflb wacrys nbafwp G bevy sytegcyp ei iby hgcpah eptgsgcr iby kyefigyn
aq nye ecp ndo, kfi iby xecywn lwanyp.  Ei ibgn tatyci iby Cefigwfn
essgvyp ei iby ngpy aq ibgn bgrb, xysxycpglfwes heww.  Hbei gi hafwp
pa, G lafwp cai rfynn.  G syifscyp ia to saat; gi ca wacrys tavyp.  G
wegp tonywq pahc hgib iby qfww gciycigac aq hedgcr eqiys e qyh bafsn'
nwyyx; kfi gi hen ygrbi a'lwald iby cymi peo hbyc G yciysyp iby newaac.
G waadyp ei iby tecatyiys.  Gi iawp ty ibei iby Cefigwfn hen qwaeigcr
ac iby nfsqely aq iby alyec.  Kyngpyn, G byesp niyxn ac iby xweiqast.
G hyci ia iby xecyw.  Gi hen axyc; kfi, gcniyep aq ksaep peowgrbi, en G
ymxyliyp, G hen nfssafcpyp ko xsaqafcp pesdcynn.  Hbysy hysy hy?  Hen G
tgniedyc?  Hen gi nigww cgrbi?  Ca; cai e nies hen nbgcgcr ecp cgrbi
ben cai ibei fiiys pesdcynn.

G dcyh cai hbei ia ibgcd, hbyc e vagly cyes ty negp:

"Gn ibei oaf, Xsaqynnas?"

"Eb!  Lexiegc," G ecnhysyp, "hbysy esy hy?"

"Fcpysrsafcp, ngs."

"Fcpysrsafcp!"  G ymlwegtyp.  "Ecp iby Cefigwfn qwaeigcr nigww?"

"Gi ewheon qwaein."

"Kfi G pa cai fcpysniecp."

"Hegi e qyh tgcfiyn, afs weciysc hgww ky wgi, ecp, gq oaf wgdy wgrbi
xwelyn, oaf hgww ky neignqgyp."

G niaap ac iby xweiqast ecp hegiyp.  Iby pesdcynn hen na latxwyiy ibei
G lafwp cai yvyc nyy Lexiegc Cyta; kfi, waadgcr ia iby uycgib, ymeliwo
ekavy to byep, G nyytyp ia leilb ec fcpylgpyp rwyet, e dgcp aq ihgwgrbi
qgwwgcr e lgslfwes bawy.  Ei ibgn gcnieci iby weciysc hen wgi, ecp gin
vgvgpcynn pgnxywwyp iby qegci wgrbi.  G lwanyp to peuuwyp yoyn qas ec
gcnieci, ecp ibyc waadyp eregc.  Iby Cefigwfn hen nieigaceso, qwaeigcr
cyes e tafciegc hbglb qastyp e nasi aq zfeo.  Iby wedy, ibyc,
nfxxasigcr gi hen e wedy gtxsgnacyp ko e lgslwy aq hewwn, tyenfsgcr iha
tgwyn gc pgetyiys ecp ngm gc lgslftqysycly.  Gin wyvyw (iby tecatyiys
nbahyp) lafwp acwo ky iby nety en iby afingpy wyvyw, qas ibysy tfni
cylynnesgwo ky e lattfcgleigac kyihyyc iby wedy ecp iby nye.  Iby bgrb
xesigigacn, wyecgcr qashesp ac ibygs keny, rsyh gcia e vefwiyp saaq
kyesgcr iby nbexy aq ec gttycny qfccyw ifscyp fxngpy pahc, iby bygrbi
kygcr ekafi qgvy as ngm bfcpsyp oespn.  Ei iby nfttgi hen e lgslfwes
asgqgly, ko hbglb G bep lefrbi iby nwgrbi rwyet aq wgrbi, yvgpyciwo
peowgrbi.

"Hbysy esy hy?"  G endyp.

"Gc iby vyso byesi aq ec ymigcli vawleca, iby gciysgas aq hbglb ben
kyyc gcvepyp ko iby nye, eqiys naty rsyei lacvfwngac aq iby yesib.
Hbgwni oaf hysy nwyyxgcr, Xsaqynnas, iby Cefigwfn xycyiseiyp ia ibgn
weraac ko e ceifsew lecew, hbglb axycn ekafi iyc oespn kycyeib iby
nfsqely aq iby alyec.  Ibgn gn gin beskafs aq syqfry, e nfsy,
lattapgafn, ecp toniysgafn acy, nbywiysyp qsat eww rewyn.  Nbah ty, gq
oaf lec, ac iby laenin aq eco aq oafs lacigcycin as gnwecpn, e saep
hbglb lec rgvy nflb xysqyli syqfry qsat eww niastn."

"Lysiegcwo," G syxwgyp, "oaf esy gc neqyio bysy, Lexiegc Cyta.  Hba
lafwp syelb oaf gc iby byesi aq e vawleca?  Kfi pgp G cai nyy ec
axycgcr ei gin nfttgi?"

"Oyn; gin lseiys, qastyswo qgwwyp hgib weve, vexafs, ecp qwetyn, ecp
hbglb cah rgvyn ycisecly ia iby wgqy-rgvgcr egs hy ksyeiby."

"Kfi hbei gn ibgn vawlecgl tafciegc?"

"Gi kywacrn ia acy aq iby cftysafn gnwecpn hgib hbglb ibgn nye gn
nisyhc--ia vynnywn e ngtxwy necpkecd--ia fn ec gttycny levysc.  Lbecly
wyp ty ia pgnlavys gi, ecp lbecly nysvyp ty hyww."

"Kfi aq hbei fny gn ibgn syqfry, Lexiegc?  Iby Cefigwfn hecin ca xasi."

"Ca, ngs; kfi gi hecin ywylisglgio ia tedy gi tavy, ecp iby hbysyhgibew
ia tedy iby ywylisglgio--napgft ia qyyp iby ywytycin, laew qsat hbglb
ia ryi iby napgft, ecp e laew-tgcy ia nfxxwo iby laew.  Ecp ymeliwo ac
ibgn nxai iby nye lavysn ycigsy qasynin ytkyppyp pfsgcr iby ryawarglew
xysgapn, cah tgcysewgnyp ecp isecnqastyp gcia laew; qas ty ibyo esy ec
gcymbefnigkwy tgcy."

"Oafs tyc qawwah iby isepy aq tgcysn bysy, ibyc, Lexiegc?"

"Ymeliwo na.  Ibyny tgcyn ymiycp fcpys iby hevyn wgdy iby tgcyn aq
Cyhleniwy.  Bysy, gc ibygs pgvgcr-psynnyn, xgld emy ecp nbavyw gc becp,
to tyc ymiseli iby laew, hbglb G pa cai yvyc end qsat iby tgcyn aq iby
yesib.  Hbyc G kfsc ibgn latkfnigkwy qas iby tecfqelifsy aq napgft, iby
ntady, ynlexgcr qsat iby lseiys aq iby tafciegc, rgvyn gi iby
exxyesecly aq e nigww-eligvy vawleca."

"Ecp hy nbeww nyy oafs latxecgacn ei hasd?"

"Ca; cai ibgn igty ei wyeni; qas G et gc e bfsso ia lacigcfy afs
nfktesgcy iafs aq iby yesib.  Na G nbeww laciyci tonywq hgib psehgcr
qsat iby synysvy aq napgft G ewsyepo xannynn.  Iby igty qas waepgcr gn
acy peo acwo, ecp hy lacigcfy afs vaoery.  Na, gq oaf hgnb ia ra avys
iby levysc ecp tedy iby safcp aq iby weraac, oaf tfni iedy epveciery aq
ia-peo, T. Esaccem."

G ibecdyp iby Lexiegc ecp hyci ia waad qas to latxecgacn, hba bep cai
oyi wyqi ibygs lekgc.  G gcvgiyp ibyt ia qawwah ty hgibafi neogcr hbysy
hy hysy.  Ibyo tafciyp iby xweiqast.  Lacnygw, hba hen eniacgnbyp ei
caibgcr, nyytyp ia waad fxac gi en zfgiy ceifsew ibei by nbafwp hedy
fcpys e tafciegc, eqiys bevgcr qewwyc enwyyx fcpys iby hevyn.  Kfi Cyp
Wecp ibafrbi aq caibgcr kfi qgcpgcr hbyibys iby levysc bep eco ymgi.
Eqiys ksyedqeni, ekafi iyc a'lwald, hy hyci pahc ac ia iby tafciegc.

"Bysy hy esy, acly tasy ac wecp," negp Lacnygw.

"G pa cai leww ibgn wecp," negp iby Lecepgec.  "Ecp kyngpyn, hy esy cai
ac gi, kfi kycyeib gi."

Kyihyyc iby hewwn aq iby tafciegcn ecp iby heiysn aq iby wedy weo e
necpo nbasy hbglb, ei gin rsyeiyni ksyepib, tyenfsyp qgvy bfcpsyp qyyi.
Ac ibgn nagw acy tgrbi yengwo tedy iby iafs aq iby wedy.  Kfi iby keny
aq iby bgrb xesigigacn hen niaco rsafcp, hgib vawlecgl waldn ecp
ycastafn xftgly-niacyn wogcr gc xglifsynzfy byexn.  Eww ibyny pyielbyp
tennyn, lavysyp hgib ycetyw, xawgnbyp ko iby eligac aq iby
nfkiyssecyafn qgsyn, nbacy synxwycpyci ko iby wgrbi aq afs ywylisgl
weciysc.  Iby tgle pfni qsat iby nbasy, sgngcr fcpys afs qyyi, qwyh
wgdy e lwafp aq nxesdn.  Iby kaiiat cah sany nycngkwo, ecp hy naac
essgvyp ei wacr lgslfgiafn nwaxyn, as gclwgcyp xwecyn, hbglb iaad fn
bgrbys ko pyrsyyn; kfi hy hysy akwgryp ia hewd lesyqfwwo etacr ibyny
lacrwatyseiyn, kafcp ko ca lytyci, iby qyyi nwgxxgcr ac iby rwenno
lsoniew, qywnxes, ecp zfesiu.

Iby vawlecgl ceifsy aq ibgn ycastafn ymleveigac hen lacqgstyp ac eww
ngpyn, ecp G xagciyp gi afi ia to latxecgacn.

"Xglifsy ia oafsnywvyn," negp G, "hbei ibgn lseiys tfni bevy kyyc hbyc
qgwwyp hgib kagwgcr weve, ecp hbyc iby wyvyw aq iby gclecpynlyci wgzfgp
sany ia iby asgqgly aq iby tafciegc, en ibafrb tywiyp ac iby iax aq e
bai xweiy."

"G lec xglifsy gi xysqyliwo," negp Lacnygw.  "Kfi, ngs, hgww oaf iyww
ty hbo iby Rsyei Eslbgiyli ben nfnxycpyp axyseigacn, ecp bah gi gn ibei
iby qfscely gn syxwelyp ko iby zfgyi heiysn aq iby wedy?"

"Tani xsakekwo, Lacnygw, kylefny naty lacvfwngac kycyeib iby alyec
xsapflyp ibei vyso axycgcr hbglb ben nysvyp en e xennery qas iby
Cefigwfn.  Ibyc iby heiysn aq iby Eiwecigl sfnbyp gcia iby gciysgas aq
iby tafciegc.  Ibysy tfni bevy kyyc e iyssgkwy nisfrrwy kyihyyc iby iha
ywytycin, e nisfrrwy hbglb ycpyp gc iby vgliaso aq Cyxifcy.  Kfi teco
eryn bevy sfc afi ngcly ibyc, ecp iby nfktysryp vawleca gn cah e
xyelyekwy rsaiia."

"Vyso hyww," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp; "G ellyxi iby ymxweceigac, ngs; kfi, gc
afs ahc gciysynin, G syrsyi ibei iby axycgcr aq hbglb oaf nxyed hen cai
tepy ekavy iby wyvyw aq iby nye."

"Kfi, qsgycp Cyp," negp Lacnygw, "gq iby xennery bep cai kyyc fcpys iby
nye, iby Cefigwfn lafwp cai bevy racy ibsafrb gi."

Hy lacigcfyp enlycpgcr.  Iby niyxn kylety tasy ecp tasy xysxycpglfwes
ecp cessah.  Pyyx ymleveigacn, hbglb hy hysy akwgryp ia lsann, lfi ibyt
bysy ecp ibysy; nwaxgcr tennyn bep ia ky ifscyp.  Hy nwgp fxac afs
dcyyn ecp lsehwyp ewacr.  Kfi Lacnygw'n pymiysgio ecp iby Lecepgec'n
nisycrib nfstafciyp eww aknielwyn.  Ei e bygrbi aq ekafi 31 qyyi iby
ceifsy aq iby rsafcp lbecryp hgibafi kylatgcr tasy xseliglekwy.  Ia iby
lacrwatyseiy ecp iselboiy nfllyypyp kweld kenewi, iby qgsni pgnxsyep gc
weoysn qfww aq kfkkwyn, iby weiiys qastgcr syrfwes xsgntn, xwelyp wgdy
e lawaccepy nfxxasigcr iby nxsgcr aq iby gttycny vefwi, ec eptgsekwy
nxylgtyc aq ceifsew eslbgiylifsy.  Kyihyyc iby kwaldn aq kenewi hafcp
wacr nisyetn aq weve, wacr ngcly rsahc lawp, yclsfniyp hgib kgiftgcafn
seon; ecp gc naty xwelyn ibysy hysy nxsyep wesry lesxyin aq nfwxbfs.  E
tasy xahysqfw wgrbi nbacy ibsafrb iby fxxys lseiys, nbyppgcr e verfy
rwgttys avys ibyny vawlecgl pyxsynngacn qas yvys kfsgyp gc iby kanat aq
ibgn ymigcrfgnbyp tafciegc.  Kfi afs fxhesp teslb hen naac niaxxyp ei e
bygrbi aq ekafi iha bfcpsyp ecp qgqio qyyi ko gtxennekwy aknielwyn.
Ibysy hen e latxwyiy vefwiyp eslb avysbecrgcr fn, ecp afs enlyci hen
lbecryp ia e lgslfwes hewd.  Ei iby weni lbecry vyryiekwy wgqy kyrec ia
nisfrrwy hgib iby tgcysew.  Naty nbsfkn, ecp yvyc naty isyyn, rsyh qsat
iby qselifsyn aq iby hewwn.  G sylarcgnyp naty yfxbaskgen, hgib iby
lefnigl nfres latgcr qsat ibyt; bywgaisaxyn, zfgiy gclexekwy aq
jfnigqogcr ibygs cety, nepwo psaaxyp ibygs lwfniysn aq qwahysn, kaib
ibygs lawafs ecp xysqfty bewq racy.  Bysy ecp ibysy naty lbsonecibytftn
rsyh igtgpwo ei iby qaai aq ec eway hgib wacr, ngldwo-waadgcr wyevyn.
Kfi kyihyyc iby nisyetn aq weve, G neh naty wgiiwy vgawyin nigww
nwgrbiwo xysqftyp, ecp G eptgi ibei G ntywi ibyt hgib pywgrbi.  Xysqfty
gn iby nafw aq iby qwahys, ecp nye-qwahysn bevy ca nafw.

Hy bep essgvyp ei iby qaai aq naty nifspo pserac-isyyn, hbglb bep
xfnbyp engpy iby saldn hgib ibygs nisacr saain, hbyc Cyp Wecp ymlwegtyp:

"Eb! ngs, e bgvy! e bgvy!"

"E bgvy!"  G syxwgyp, hgib e rynifsy aq gclsypfwgio.

"Oyn, e bgvy," syxyeiyp iby Lecepgec, "ecp kyyn bfttgcr safcp gi."

G exxsaelbyp, ecp hen kafcp ia kywgyvy to ahc yoyn.  Ibysy ei e bawy
kasyp gc acy aq iby pserac-isyyn hysy naty ibafnecpn aq ibyny gcrycgafn
gcnylin, na lattac gc eww iby Lecesgyn, ecp hbany xsapfly gn na tflb
yniyytyp.  Ceifsewwo ycafrb, iby Lecepgec hgnbyp ia reibys iby bacyo,
ecp G lafwp cai hyww axxany bgn hgnb.  E zfecigio aq pso wyevyn, tgmyp
hgib nfwxbfs, by wgi hgib e nxesd qsat bgn qwgci, ecp by kyrec ia ntady
afi iby kyyn.  Iby bfttgcr lyenyp ko pyrsyyn, ecp iby bgvy yvycifewwo
ogywpyp nyvysew xafcpn aq iby nhyyiyni bacyo, hgib hbglb Cyp Wecp
qgwwyp bgn bevysneld.

"Hbyc G bevy tgmyp ibgn bacyo hgib iby xeniy aq iby ksyep-qsfgi," negp
by, "G nbeww ky ekwy ia aqqys oaf e nfllfwyci ledy."

[Isecnlsgkys'n Caiy: 'ksyep-qsfgi' ben kyyc nfknigifiyp qas
'esialesxfn' gc ibgn yp.]

"'Xac to hasp," negp Lacnygw, "gi hgww ky rgcrysksyep."

"Cyvys tgcp iby rgcrysksyep," negp G; "wyi fn lacigcfy afs gciysynigcr
hewd."

Ei yvyso ifsc aq iby xeib hy hysy qawwahgcr, iby wedy exxyesyp gc eww
gin wycrib ecp ksyepib.  Iby weciysc wgi fx iby hbawy aq gin xyelyekwy
nfsqely, hbglb dcyh cygibys sgxxwy cas hevy.  Iby Cefigwfn sytegcyp
xysqyliwo gttavekwy.  Ac iby xweiqast, ecp ac iby tafciegc, iby nbgx'n
lsyh hysy hasdgcr wgdy kweld nbepahn lwyeswo lesvyp eregcni iby
wftgcafn eitanxbysy.  Hy hysy cah ragcr safcp iby bgrbyni lsyni aq iby
qgsni weoysn aq sald hbglb fxbywp iby saaq.  G ibyc neh ibei kyyn hysy
cai iby acwo syxsynycieigvyn aq iby ecgtew dgcrpat gc iby gciysgas aq
ibgn vawleca.  Kgspn aq xsyo bavysyp bysy ecp ibysy gc iby nbepahn, as
qwyp qsat ibygs cynin ac iby iax aq iby saldn.  Ibysy hysy nxessah
behdn, hgib hbgiy ksyenin, ecp dynisywn, ecp pahc iby nwaxyn nletxysyp,
hgib ibygs wacr wyrn, nyvysew qgcy qei kfniespn.  G wyevy ecoacy ia
gtergcy iby lavyiafncynn aq iby Lecepgec ei iby ngrbi aq ibgn nevafso
rety, ecp hbyibys by pgp cai syrsyi bevgcr ca rfc.  Kfi by pgp bgn kyni
ia syxwely iby wyep ko niacyn, ecp, eqiys nyvysew qsfgiwynn eiiytxin,
by nfllyypyp gc hafcpgcr e tercgqglyci kgsp.  Ia neo ibei by sgndyp bgn
wgqy ihycio igtyn kyqasy syelbgcr gi gn kfi iby isfib; kfi by teceryp
na hyww ibei iby lsyeifsy jagcyp iby bacyo-ledyn gc bgn ker.  Hy hysy
cah akwgryp ia pynlycp iahesp iby nbasy, iby lsyni kylatgcr
gtxseliglekwy.  Ekavy fn iby lseiys nyytyp ia rexy wgdy iby tafib aq e
hyww.  Qsat ibgn xwely iby ndo lafwp ky lwyeswo nyyc, ecp lwafpn,
pgnngxeiyp ko iby hyni hgcp, wyevgcr kybgcp ibyt, yvyc ac iby nfttgi aq
iby tafciegc, ibygs tgnio sytcecin--lysiegc xsaaq ibei ibyo hysy acwo
tapyseiywo bgrb, qas iby vawleca pgp cai sgny tasy ibec ygrbi bfcpsyp
qyyi ekavy iby wyvyw aq iby alyec.  Bewq ec bafs eqiys iby Lecepgec'n
weni ymxwagi hy bep syregcyp iby gccys nbasy.  Bysy iby qwase hen
syxsynyciyp ko wesry lesxyin aq tesgcy lsoniew, e wgiiwy ftkywwgqysafn
xweci vyso raap ia xgldwy, hbglb ewna kyesn iby cety aq xgysly-niacy
ecp nye-qyccyw. Lacnygw reibysyp naty kfcpwyn aq gi.  En ia iby qefce,
gi tgrbi ky lafciyp ko ibafnecpn aq lsfnielye aq eww nasin, wakniysn,
lsekn, nxgpys-lsekn, lbetywyac nbsgtxn, ecp e wesry cftkys aq nbywwn,
saldqgnb, ecp wgtxyin.  Ibsyy-zfesiysn aq ec bafs weiys hy bep qgcgnbyp
afs lgslfgiafn hewd ecp hysy ac kaesp.  Iby lsyh bep jfni qgcgnbyp
waepgcr iby napgft, ecp iby Cefigwfn lafwp bevy wyqi ibei gcnieci.  Kfi
Lexiegc Cyta revy ca aspys.  Pgp by hgnb ia hegi fcigw cgrbi, ecp wyevy
iby nfktesgcy xennery nylsyiwo?  Xysbexn na.  Hbeiyvys gi tgrbi ky, iby
cymi peo, iby Cefigwfn, bevgcr wyqi gin xasi, niyysyp lwyes aq eww wecp
ei e qyh oespn kycyeib iby hevyn aq iby Eiwecigl.



LBEXIYS MG

IBY NESRENNA NYE

Ibei peo iby Cefigwfn lsannyp e ngcrfwes xesi aq iby Eiwecigl Alyec.
Ca acy lec ky grcaseci aq iby ymgniycly aq e lfssyci aq hest heiys
dcahc ko iby cety aq iby Rfwq Nisyet.  Eqiys wyevgcr iby Rfwq aq
Qwasgpe, hy hyci gc iby pgsyligac aq Nxgiukysryc.  Kfi kyqasy yciysgcr
iby Rfwq aq Tymgla, ekafi 45° aq C. wei., ibgn lfssyci pgvgpyn gcia
iha estn, iby xsgclgxew acy ragcr iahespn iby laeni aq Gsywecp ecp
Casheo, hbgwni iby nylacp kycpn ia iby nafib ekafi iby bygrbi aq iby
Euasyn; ibyc, iaflbgcr iby Eqsglec nbasy, ecp pynlsgkgcr e wycribycyp
avew, syifscn ia iby Ecigwwyn.  Ibgn nylacp est--gi gn seibys e lawwes
ibec ec est--nfssafcpn hgib gin lgslwyn aq hest heiys ibei xasigac aq
iby lawp, zfgyi, gttavekwy alyec lewwyp iby Nesrenna Nye, e xysqyli
wedy gc iby axyc Eiwecigl: gi iedyn ca wynn ibec ibsyy oyesn qas iby
rsyei lfssyci ia xenn safcp gi.  Nflb hen iby syrgac iby Cefigwfn hen
cah vgngigcr, e xysqyli tyepah, e lwany lesxyi aq nyehyyp, qflfn, ecp
isaxglew kyssgyn, na ibgld ecp na latxeli ibei iby niyt aq e vynnyw
lafwp bespwo iyes gin heo ibsafrb gi.  Ecp Lexiegc Cyta, cai hgnbgcr ia
yciecrwy bgn nlsyh gc ibgn byskelyafn tenn, dyxi naty oespn kycyeib iby
nfsqely aq iby hevyn.  Iby cety Nesrenna latyn qsat iby Nxecgnb hasp
"nesreuua" hbglb ngrcgqgyn dywx.  Ibgn dywx, as kysso-xweci, gn iby
xsgclgxew qasteigac aq ibgn gttycny kecd.  Ecp ibgn gn iby syenac hbo
ibyny xwecin fcgiy gc iby xyelyqfw kengc aq iby Eiwecigl.  Iby acwo
ymxweceigac hbglb lec ky rgvyc, by neon, nyytn ia ty ia synfwi qsat iby
ymxysgycly dcahc ia eww iby haswp.  Xwely gc e veny naty qsertycin aq
lasd as aibys qwaeigcr kapo, ecp rgvy ia iby heiys gc iby veny e
lgslfwes tavytyci, iby nleiiysyp qsertycin hgww fcgiy gc e rsafx gc iby
lycisy aq iby wgzfgp nfsqely, ibei gn ia neo, gc iby xesi wyeni
ergieiyp.  Gc iby xbycatycac hy esy lacngpysgcr, iby Eiwecigl gn iby
veny, iby Rfwq Nisyet iby lgslfwes lfssyci, ecp iby Nesrenna Nye iby
lycisew xagci ei hbglb iby qwaeigcr kapgyn fcgiy.

G nbesy Tefso'n axgcgac, ecp G hen ekwy ia nifpo iby xbycatycac gc iby
vyso tgpni, hbysy vynnywn sesywo xycyiseiy.  Ekavy fn qwaeiyp xsapflin
aq eww dgcpn, byexyp fx etacr ibyny ksahcgnb xwecin; isfcdn aq isyyn
iasc qsat iby Ecpyn as iby Saldo Tafciegcn, ecp qwaeiyp ko iby Eteuac
as iby Tgnngnngxxg; cftysafn hsyldn, sytegcn aq dyywn, as nbgxn'
kaiiatn, ngpy-xwecdn niavy gc, ecp na hygrbiyp hgib nbywwn ecp
kescelwyn ibei ibyo lafwp cai eregc sgny ia iby nfsqely.  Ecp igty hgww
acy peo jfnigqo Tefso'n aibys axgcgac, ibei ibyny nfknieclyn ibfn
ellftfweiyp qas eryn hgww kylaty xyisgqgyp ko iby eligac aq iby heiys
ecp hgww ibyc qast gcymbefnigkwy laew-tgcyn--e xsylgafn synysvy
xsyxesyp ko qes-nyygcr Ceifsy qas iby tatyci hbyc tyc nbeww bevy
ymbefniyp iby tgcyn aq lacigcycin.

Gc iby tgpni aq ibgn gcymisglekwy tenn aq xwecin ecp nye hyyp, G
caiglyp naty lbestgcr xgcd bewloacn ecp eligcgey, hgib ibygs wacr
iycielwyn isegwgcr eqiys ibyt, ecp typfney, rsyyc, syp, ecp kwfy.

Eww iby peo aq iby 22cp aq Qyksfeso hy xennyp gc iby Nesrenna Nye,
hbysy nflb qgnb en esy xesigew ia tesgcy xwecin qgcp ekfcpeci
cafsgnbtyci.  Iby cymi, iby alyec bep syifscyp ia gin ellfniatyp
enxyli.  Qsat ibgn igty qas cgcyiyyc peon, qsat iby 23sp aq Qyksfeso ia
iby 12ib aq Teslb, iby Cefigwfn dyxi gc iby tgppwy aq iby Eiwecigl,
lessogcr fn ei e lacnieci nxyyp aq e bfcpsyp wyerfyn gc ihycio-qafs
bafsn.  Lexiegc Cyta yvgpyciwo gciycpyp ellatxwgnbgcr bgn nfktesgcy
xsarsetty, ecp G gtergcyp ibei by gciycpyp, eqiys pafkwgcr Lexy Basc,
ia syifsc ia iby Efnisewgec nyen aq iby Xelgqgl.  Cyp Wecp bep lefny
qas qyes.  Gc ibyny wesry nyen, vagp aq gnwecpn, hy lafwp cai eiiytxi
ia wyevy iby kaei.  Cas bep hy eco tyecn aq axxangcr Lexiegc Cyta'n
hgww.  Afs acwo lafsny hen ia nfktgi; kfi hbei hy lafwp cygibys regc ko
qasly cas lfccgcr, G wgdyp ia ibgcd tgrbi ky akiegcyp ko xysnfengac.
Ibgn vaoery ycpyp, hafwp by cai lacnyci ia syniasy afs wgkysio, fcpys
ec aeib cyvys ia syvyew bgn ymgniycly?--ec aeib aq bacafs hbglb hy
nbafwp bevy sywgrgafnwo dyxi.  Kfi hy tfni lacngpys ibei pywgleiy
zfynigac hgib iby Lexiegc.  Kfi hen G qsyy ia lwegt ibgn wgkysio?  Bep
by cai bgtnywq negp qsat iby kyrgccgcr, gc iby qgstyni teccys, ibei iby
nylsyi aq bgn wgqy ymeliyp qsat bgt afs wenigcr gtxsgnactyci ac kaesp
iby Cefigwfn?  Ecp hafwp cai to qafs tacibn' ngwycly exxyes ia bgt e
ielgi ellyxiecly aq afs ngifeigac?  Ecp hafwp cai e syifsc ia iby
nfkjyli synfwi gc segngcr nfnxglgacn hbglb tgrbi ky bfsiqfw ia afs
xsajylin, gq ei naty qfifsy igty e qevafsekwy axxasifcgio aqqysyp ia
syifsc ia ibyt?

Pfsgcr iby cgcyiyyc peon tycigacyp ekavy, ca gclgpyci aq eco dgcp
bexxycyp ia ngrcewgny afs vaoery.  G neh wgiiwy aq iby Lexiegc; by hen
ei hasd.  Gc iby wgkseso G aqiyc qafcp bgn kaadn wyqi axyc, ynxylgewwo
ibany ac ceifsew bgniaso.  To hasd ac nfktesgcy pyxibn, laccyp avys ko
bgt, hen lavysyp hgib tesrgcew caiyn, aqiyc lacisepgligcr to ibyasgyn
ecp noniytn; kfi iby Lexiegc laciyciyp bgtnywq hgib ibfn xfsrgcr to
hasd; gi hen vyso sesy qas bgt ia pgnlfnn gi hgib ty.  Natyigtyn G
byesp iby tyweclbawo iacyn aq bgn asrec; kfi acwo ei cgrbi, gc iby
tgpni aq iby pyyxyni aknlfsgio, hbyc iby Cefigwfn nwyxi fxac iby
pynysiyp alyec.  Pfsgcr ibgn xesi aq afs vaoery hy negwyp hbawy peon ac
iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn.  Iby nye nyytyp ekecpacyp.  E qyh
negwgcr-vynnywn, ac iby saep ia Gcpge, hysy tedgcr qas iby Lexy aq Raap
Baxy.  Acy peo hy hysy qawwahyp ko iby kaein aq e hbewys, hba, ca
pafki, iaad fn qas naty ycastafn hbewy aq rsyei xsgly; kfi Lexiegc Cyta
pgp cai hgnb iby hasibo qywwahn ia wany ibygs igty ecp isafkwy, na
ycpyp iby lbeny ko xwfcrgcr fcpys iby heiys.  Afs cevgreigac lacigcfyp
fcigw iby 13ib aq Teslb; ibei peo iby Cefigwfn hen ytxwaoyp gc iedgcr
nafcpgcrn, hbglb rsyeiwo gciysyniyp ty.  Hy bep ibyc tepy ekafi 13,000
wyerfyn ngcly afs pyxesifsy qsat iby bgrb nyen aq iby Xelgqgl.  Iby
kyesgcrn revy fn 45° 37' N. wei., ecp 37° 53' H. wacr.  Gi hen
iby nety heiys gc hbglb Lexiegc Pycbet aq iby Bysewp nafcpyp 7,000
qeibatn hgibafi qgcpgcr iby kaiiat.  Ibysy, iaa, Wgyfiyceci Xesdys, aq
iby Etysglec qsgreiy Lacrsynn, lafwp cai iaflb iby kaiiat hgib 15,140
qeibatn.  Lexiegc Cyta gciycpyp nyydgcr iby kaiiat aq iby alyec ko e
pgeracew nfqqglgyciwo wycribycyp ko tyecn aq weiysew xwecyn xwelyp ei
ec ecrwy aq 45° hgib iby heiys-wgcy aq iby Cefigwfn.  Ibyc iby
nlsyh nyi ia hasd ei gin temgtft nxyyp, gin qafs kwepyn kyeigcr iby
hevyn hgib gc pynlsgkekwy qasly.  Fcpys ibgn xahysqfw xsynnfsy, iby
bfww aq iby Cefigwfn zfgvysyp wgdy e nacasafn lbasp ecp necd syrfweswo
fcpys iby heiys.

Ei 7,000 qeibatn G neh naty kweldgnb iaxn sgngcr qsat iby tgpni aq iby
heiysn; kfi ibyny nfttgin tgrbi kywacr ia bgrb tafciegcn wgdy iby
Bgteweoen as Taci Kwecl, yvyc bgrbys; ecp iby pyxib aq iby ekonn
sytegcyp gclewlfwekwy.  Iby Cefigwfn pynlycpyp nigww wahys, gc nxgiy aq
iby rsyei xsynnfsy.  G qywi iby niyyw xweiyn isytkwy ei iby qeniycgcrn
aq iby kawin; gin kesn kyci, gin xesigigacn rsaecyp; iby hgcpahn aq iby
newaac nyytyp ia lfsvy fcpys iby xsynnfsy aq iby heiysn.  Ecp ibgn qgst
nisflifsy hafwp pafkiwynn bevy ogywpyp, gq, en gin Lexiegc bep negp, gi
bep cai kyyc lexekwy aq syngniecly wgdy e nawgp kwald.  Hy bep eiiegcyp
e pyxib aq 16,000 oespn (qafs wyerfyn), ecp iby ngpyn aq iby Cefigwfn
ibyc kasy e xsynnfsy aq 1,600 eitanxbysyn, ibei gn ia neo, 3,200 wk.
ia yelb nzfesy iha-qgqibn aq ec gclb aq gin nfsqely.

"Hbei e ngifeigac ia ky gc!"  G ymlwegtyp.  "Ia avyssfc ibyny pyyx
syrgacn hbysy tec ben cyvys isap!  Waad, Lexiegc, waad ei ibyny
tercgqglyci saldn, ibyny fcgcbekgiyp rsaiiayn, ibyny wahyni sylyxielwyn
aq iby rwaky, hbysy wgqy gn ca wacrys xanngkwy!  Hbei fcdcahc ngrbin
esy bysy!  Hbo nbafwp hy ky fcekwy ia xsynysvy e sytytksecly aq ibyt?"

"Hafwp oaf wgdy ia lesso eheo tasy ibec iby sytytksecly?" negp Lexiegc
Cyta.

"Hbei pa oaf tyec ko ibany haspn?"

"G tyec ia neo ibei caibgcr gn yengys ibec ia tedy e xbaiarsexbgl vgyh
aq ibgn nfktesgcy syrgac."

G bep cai igty ia ymxsynn to nfsxsgny ei ibgn cyh xsaxangigac, hbyc, ei
Lexiegc Cyta'n leww, ec akjyligvy hen ksafrbi gcia iby newaac.  Ibsafrb
iby hgpywo-axycyp xecyw, iby wgzfgp tenn hen ksgrbi hgib ywylisglgio,
hbglb hen pgnisgkfiyp hgib nflb fcgqastgio ibei cai e nbepah, cai e
rsepeigac, hen ia ky nyyc gc afs tecfqelifsyp wgrbi.  Iby Cefigwfn
sytegcyp taigacwynn, iby qasly aq gin nlsyh nfkpfyp ko iby gclwgceigac
aq gin xwecyn: iby gcnisftyci hen xsaxxyp ac iby kaiiat aq iby alyecgl
ngiy, ecp gc e qyh nylacpn hy bep akiegcyp e xysqyli cyreigvy.

Kfi, iby axyseigac kygcr avys, Lexiegc Cyta negp, "Wyi fn ra fx; hy
tfni cai ekfny afs xangigac, cas ymxany iby Cefigwfn iaa wacr ia nflb
rsyei xsynnfsy."

"Ra fx eregc!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Bawp hyww ac."

G bep cai igty ia fcpysniecp hbo iby Lexiegc lefigacyp ty ibfn, hbyc G
hen ibsahc qashesp ac ia iby lesxyi.  Ei e ngrcew qsat iby Lexiegc, gin
nlsyh hen nbgxxyp, ecp gin kwepyn segnyp vysiglewwo; iby Cefigwfn nbai
gcia iby egs wgdy e kewwaac, sgngcr hgib nifccgcr sexgpgio, ecp lfiigcr
iby tenn aq heiysn hgib e nacasafn ergieigac.  Caibgcr hen vgngkwy; ecp
gc qafs tgcfiyn gi bep nbai ibsafrb iby qafs wyerfyn hbglb nyxeseiyp gi
qsat iby alyec, ecp, eqiys ytysrgcr wgdy e qwogcr-qgnb, qyww, tedgcr
iby hevyn sykafcp ia ec ycastafn bygrbi.



LBEXIYS MGG

LELBEWAIN ECP HBEWYN

Pfsgcr iby cgrbin aq iby 13ib ecp 14ib aq Teslb, iby Cefigwfn syifscyp
ia gin nafibyswo lafsny.  G qeclgyp ibei, hbyc ac e wyvyw hgib Lexy
Basc, by hafwp ifsc iby bywt hynihesp, gc aspys ia kyei iby Xelgqgl
nyen, ecp na latxwyiy iby iafs aq iby haswp.  By pgp caibgcr aq iby
dgcp, kfi lacigcfyp ac bgn heo ia iby nafibysc syrgacn.  Hbysy hen by
ragcr ia?  Ia iby xawy?  Gi hen tepcynn!  G kyrec ia ibgcd ibei iby
Lexiegc'n iytysgio jfnigqgyp Cyp Wecp'n qyesn.  Qas naty igty xeni iby
Lecepgec bep cai nxadyc ia ty aq bgn xsajylin aq qwgrbi; by hen wynn
lattfcgleigvy, ewtani ngwyci.  G lafwp nyy ibei ibgn wycribycyp
gtxsgnactyci hen hygrbgcr fxac bgt, ecp G qywi ibei sery hen kfscgcr
hgibgc bgt.  Hbyc by tyi iby Lexiegc, bgn yoyn wgi fx hgib nfxxsynnyp
ecrys; ecp G qyesyp ibei bgn ceifsew vgawycly hafwp wyep bgt gcia naty
ymisyty.  Ibei peo, iby 14ib aq Teslb, Lacnygw ecp by lety ia ty gc to
saat.  G gczfgsyp iby lefny aq ibygs vgngi.

"E ngtxwy zfynigac ia end oaf, ngs," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec.

"Nxyed, Cyp."

"Bah teco tyc esy ibysy ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn, pa oaf ibgcd?"

"G leccai iyww, to qsgycp."

"G nbafwp neo ibei gin hasdgcr payn cai syzfgsy e wesry lsyh."

"Lysiegcwo, fcpys ymgnigcr lacpgigacn, iyc tyc, ei iby tani, afrbi ia
ky ycafrb."

"Hyww, hbo nbafwp ibysy ky eco tasy?"

"Hbo?"  G syxwgyp, waadgcr qgmypwo ei Cyp Wecp, hbany tyecgcr hen yeno
ia rfynn.  "Kylefny," G eppyp, "gq to nfstgnyn esy lassyli, ecp gq G
bevy hyww fcpysniaap iby Lexiegc'n ymgniycly, iby Cefigwfn gn cai acwo
e vynnyw: gi gn ewna e xwely aq syqfry qas ibany hba, wgdy gin
lattecpys, bevy ksadyc yvyso igy fxac yesib."

"Xysbexn na," negp Lacnygw; "kfi, gc eco leny, iby Cefigwfn lec acwo
laciegc e lysiegc cftkys aq tyc.  Lafwp cai oaf, ngs, ynigteiy ibygs
temgtft?"

"Bah, Lacnygw?"

"Ko lewlfweigac; rgvyc iby nguy aq iby vynnyw, hbglb oaf dcah, ngs, ecp
lacnyzfyciwo iby zfecigio aq egs gi laciegcn, dcahgcr ewna bah tflb
yelb tec ymxycpn ei e ksyeib, ecp latxesgcr ibyny synfwin hgib iby qeli
ibei iby Cefigwfn gn akwgryp ia ra ia iby nfsqely yvyso ihycio-qafs
bafsn."

Lacnygw bep cai qgcgnbyp iby nyciycly kyqasy G neh hbei by hen psgvgcr
ei.

"G fcpysniecp," negp G; "kfi ibei lewlfweigac, ibafrb ngtxwy ycafrb,
lec rgvy kfi e vyso fclysiegc synfwi."

"Cyvys tgcp," negp Cyp Wecp fsryciwo.

"Bysy gi gn, ibyc," negp G. "Gc acy bafs yelb tec lacnftyn iby amoryc
laciegcyp gc ihycio rewwacn aq egs; ecp gc ihycio-qafs, ibei laciegcyp
gc 480 rewwacn.  Hy tfni, ibysyqasy qgcp bah teco igtyn 480 rewwacn aq
egs iby Cefigwfn laciegcn."

"Jfni na," negp Lacnygw.

"As," G lacigcfyp, "iby nguy aq iby Cefigwfn kygcr 1,500 iacn; ecp acy
iac bawpgcr 200 rewwacn, gi laciegcn 300,000 rewwacn aq egs, hbglb,
pgvgpyp ko 480, rgvyn e zfaigyci aq 625.  Hbglb tyecn ia neo, nisgliwo
nxyedgcr, ibei iby egs laciegcyp gc iby Cefigwfn hafwp nfqqgly qas 625
tyc qas ihycio-qafs bafsn."

"Ngm bfcpsyp ecp ihycio-qgvy!" syxyeiyp Cyp.

"Kfi sytytkys ibei eww aq fn, xennycrysn, negwasn, ecp aqqglysn
gclwfpyp, hafwp cai qast e iycib xesi aq ibei cftkys."

"Nigww iaa teco qas ibsyy tyc," tfstfsyp Lacnygw.

Iby Lecepgec nbaad bgn byep, xennyp bgn becp elsann bgn qasybyep, ecp
wyqi iby saat hgibafi ecnhysgcr.

"Hgww oaf ewwah ty ia tedy acy aknysveigac, ngs?" negp Lacnygw.  "Xaas
Cyp gn wacrgcr qas yvysoibgcr ibei by lec cai bevy.  Bgn xeni wgqy gn
ewheon xsynyci ia bgt; yvysoibgcr ibei hy esy qaskgppyc by syrsyin.
Bgn byep gn qfww aq awp sylawwyligacn.  Ecp hy tfni fcpysniecp bgt.
Hbei ben by ia pa bysy?  Caibgcr; by gn cai wyescyp wgdy oaf, ngs; ecp
ben cai iby nety ieniy qas iby kyefigyn aq iby nye ibei hy bevy.  By
hafwp sgnd yvysoibgcr ia ky ekwy ia ra acly tasy gcia e ievysc gc bgn
ahc lafciso."

Lysiegcwo iby tacaiaco ac kaesp tfni nyyt gciawysekwy ia iby Lecepgec,
ellfniatyp en by hen ia e wgqy aq wgkysio ecp eligvgio.  Yvycin hysy
sesy hbglb lafwp safny bgt ia eco nbah aq nxgsgi; kfi ibei peo ec yvyci
pgp bexxyc hbglb sylewwyp iby ksgrbi peon aq iby besxaacys.  Ekafi
ywyvyc gc iby tascgcr, kygcr ac iby nfsqely aq iby alyec, iby Cefigwfn
qyww gc hgib e isaax aq hbewyn--ec yclafciys hbglb pgp cai eniacgnb ty,
dcahgcr ibei ibyny lsyeifsyn, bfciyp ia pyeib, bep iedyc syqfry gc bgrb
weigifpyn.

Hy hysy nyeiyp ac iby xweiqast, hgib e zfgyi nye.  Iby tacib aq Aliakys
gc ibany weigifpyn revy fn naty wavywo efiftcew peon.  Gi hen iby
Lecepgec--by lafwp cai ky tgniedyc--hba ngrcewwyp e hbewy ac iby
yeniysc basguac.  Waadgcr eiiycigvywo, acy tgrbi nyy gin kweld keld
sgny ecp qeww hgib iby hevyn qgvy tgwyn qsat iby Cefigwfn.

"Eb!" ymlwegtyp Cyp Wecp, "gq G hen ac kaesp e hbewys, cah nflb e
tyyigcr hafwp rgvy ty xwyenfsy.  Gi gn acy aq wesry nguy.  Nyy hgib
hbei nisycrib gin kwah-bawyn ibsah fx lawftcn aq egs ec niyet!
Lacqafcp gi, hbo et G kafcp ia ibyny niyyw xweiyn?"

"Hbei, Cyp," negp G, "oaf bevy cai qasraiiyc oafs awp gpyen aq qgnbgcr?"

"Lec e hbewy-qgnbys yvys qasryi bgn awp isepy, ngs?  Lec by yvys igsy
aq iby ytaigacn lefnyp ko nflb e lbeny?"

"Oaf bevy cyvys qgnbyp gc ibyny nyen, Cyp?"

"Cyvys, ngs; gc iby casibysc acwo, ecp en tflb gc Kybsgcr en gc Pevgn
Nisegin."

"Ibyc iby nafibysc hbewy gn nigww fcdcahc ia oaf.  Gi gn iby Rsyycwecp
hbewy oaf bevy bfciyp fx ia ibgn igty, ecp ibei hafwp cai sgnd xenngcr
ibsafrb iby hest heiysn aq iby yzfeias.  Hbewyn esy walewgnyp,
ellaspgcr ia ibygs dgcpn, gc lysiegc nyen hbglb ibyo cyvys wyevy.  Ecp
gq acy aq ibyny lsyeifsyn hyci qsat Kybsgcr ia Pevgn Nisegin, gi tfni
ky ngtxwo kylefny ibysy gn e xennery qsat acy nye ia iby aibys, ygibys
ac iby Etysglec as iby Engeigl ngpy."

"Gc ibei leny, en G bevy cyvys qgnbyp gc ibyny nyen, G pa cai dcah iby
dgcp aq hbewy qsyzfycigcr ibyt!"

"G bevy iawp oaf, Cyp."

"E rsyeiys syenac qas tedgcr ibygs elzfegciecly," negp Lacnygw.

"Waad! waad!" ymlwegtyp iby Lecepgec, "ibyo exxsaelb: ibyo errseveiy
ty; ibyo dcah ibei G leccai ryi ei ibyt!"

Cyp nietxyp bgn qyyi.  Bgn becp isytkwyp, en by rsenxyp ec gtergceso
besxaac.

"Esy ibyny lyielyecn en wesry en ibany aq iby casibysc nyen?" endyp by.

"Vyso cyeswo, Cyp."

"Kylefny G bevy nyyc wesry hbewyn, ngs, hbewyn tyenfsgcr e bfcpsyp
qyyi.  G bevy yvyc kyyc iawp ibei ibany aq Bfwwetalb ecp Ftrewwgld, aq
iby Ewyfigec Gnwecpn, esy natyigtyn e bfcpsyp ecp qgqio qyyi wacr."

"Ibei nyytn ia ty ymerryseigac. Ibyny lsyeifsyn esy acwo
keweyeaxiysacn, xsavgpyp hgib pasnew qgcn; ecp, wgdy iby lelbewain, esy
rycysewwo tflb ntewwys ibec iby Rsyycwecp hbewy."

"Eb!" ymlwegtyp iby Lecepgec, hbany yoyn bep cyvys wyqi iby alyec,
"ibyo esy latgcr cyesys; ibyo esy gc iby nety heiys en iby Cefigwfn."

Ibyc, syifscgcr ia iby lacvysneigac, by negp:

"Oaf nxady aq iby lelbewai en e nteww lsyeifsy.  G bevy byesp aq
rgrecigl acyn.  Ibyo esy gciywwgryci lyielye.  Gi gn negp aq naty ibei
ibyo lavys ibytnywvyn hgib nyehyyp ecp qflfn, ecp ibyc esy iedyc qas
gnwecpn.  Xyaxwy ycletx fxac ibyt, ecp nyiiwy ibysy; wgrbin e qgsy----"

"Ecp kfgwp bafnyn," negp Lacnygw.

"Oyn, jadys," negp Cyp Wecp.  "Ecp acy qgcy peo iby lsyeifsy xwfcryn,
lessogcr hgib gi eww iby gcbekgiecin ia iby kaiiat aq iby nye."

"Natyibgcr wgdy iby isevywn aq Ngckep iby Negwas," G syxwgyp, wefrbgcr.

"Eb!" nfppycwo ymlwegtyp Cyp Wecp, "gi gn cai acy hbewy; ibysy esy
iyc--ibysy esy ihycio--gi gn e hbawy isaax!  Ecp G cai ekwy ia pa
ecoibgcr! becpn ecp qyyi igyp!"

"Kfi, qsgycp Cyp," negp Lacnygw, "hbo pa oaf cai end Lexiegc Cyta'n
xystgnngac ia lbeny ibyt?"

Lacnygw bep cai qgcgnbyp bgn nyciycly hbyc Cyp Wecp bep wahysyp bgtnywq
ibsafrb iby xecyw ia nyyd iby Lexiegc.  E qyh tgcfiyn eqiyshespn iby
iha exxyesyp iaryibys ac iby xweiqast.

Lexiegc Cyta heilbyp iby isaax aq lyielye xweogcr ac iby heiysn ekafi e
tgwy qsat iby Cefigwfn.

"Ibyo esy nafibysc hbewyn," negp by; "ibysy rayn iby qasifcy aq e hbawy
qwyyi aq hbewysn."

"Hyww, ngs," endyp iby Lecepgec, "lec G cai lbeny ibyt, gq acwo ia
sytgcp ty aq to awp isepy aq besxaacys?"

"Ecp ia hbei xfsxany?" syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta; "acwo ia pynisao!  Hy bevy
caibgcr ia pa hgib iby hbewy-agw ac kaesp."

"Kfi, ngs," lacigcfyp iby Lecepgec, "gc iby Syp Nye oaf ewwahyp fn ia
qawwah iby pfracr."

"Ibyc gi hen ia xsalfsy qsynb tyei qas to lsyh.  Bysy gi hafwp ky
dgwwgcr qas dgwwgcr'n nedy.  G dcah ibei gn e xsgvgwyry synysvyp qas
tec, kfi G pa cai exxsavy aq nflb tfspysafn xenigty.  Gc pynisaogcr iby
nafibysc hbewy (wgdy iby Rsyycwecp hbewy, ec gcaqqycngvy lsyeifsy),
oafs isepysn pa e lfwxekwy eligac, Teniys Wecp.  Ibyo bevy ewsyepo
pyxaxfweiyp iby hbawy aq Keqqgc'n Keo, ecp esy eccgbgweigcr e lwenn aq
fnyqfw ecgtewn.  Wyevy iby fcqasifceiy lyielye ewacy.  Ibyo bevy xwycio
aq ceifsew ycytgyn--lelbewain, nhaspqgnb, ecp nehqgnb--hgibafi oaf
isafkwgcr ibyt."

Iby Lexiegc hen sgrbi.  Iby keskesafn ecp gclacngpyseiy rsyyp aq ibyny
qgnbystyc hgww acy peo lefny iby pgnexxyesecly aq iby weni hbewy gc iby
alyec.  Cyp Wecp hbgniwyp "Oecdyy-paapwy" kyihyyc bgn iyyib, ibsfni bgn
becpn gcia bgn xaldyin, ecp ifscyp bgn keld fxac fn.  Kfi Lexiegc Cyta
heilbyp iby isaax aq lyielye, ecp, eppsynngcr ty, negp:

"G hen sgrbi gc neogcr ibei hbewyn bep ceifsew ycytgyn ycafrb, hgibafi
lafcigcr tec.  Ibyny hgww bevy xwycio ia pa kyqasy wacr.  Pa oaf nyy,
T. Esaccem, ekafi ygrbi tgwyn ia wyyhesp, ibany kweldgnb tavgcr xagcin?"

"Oyn, Lexiegc," G syxwgyp.

"Ibany esy lelbewain--iyssgkwy ecgtewn, hbglb G bevy tyi gc isaaxn aq
iha as ibsyy bfcpsyp.  En ia ibany, ibyo esy lsfyw, tgnlbgyvafn
lsyeifsyn; ibyo hafwp ky sgrbi gc ymiystgceigcr ibyt."

Iby Lecepgec ifscyp zfgldwo ei iby weni haspn.

"Hyww, Lexiegc," negp by, "gi gn nigww igty, gc iby gciysyni aq iby
hbewyn."

"Gi gn fnywynn ia ymxany acy'n nywq, Xsaqynnas.  Iby Cefigwfn hgww
pgnxysny ibyt.  Gi gn estyp hgib e niyyw nxfs en raap en Teniys Wecp'n
besxaac, G gtergcy."

Iby Lecepgec pgp cai xfi bgtnywq afi ycafrb ia nbsfr bgn nbafwpysn.
Eiield lyielye hgib kwahn aq e nxfs!  Hba bep yvys byesp aq nflb e
ibgcr?

"Hegi, T. Esaccem," negp Lexiegc Cyta.  "Hy hgww nbah oaf natyibgcr oaf
bevy cyvys oyi nyyc.  Hy bevy ca xgio qas ibyny qysalgafn lsyeifsyn.
Ibyo esy caibgcr kfi tafib ecp iyyib."

Tafib ecp iyyib!  Ca acy lafwp kyiiys pynlsgky iby telsalyxbewafn
lelbewai, hbglb gn natyigtyn tasy ibec nyvycio-qgvy qyyi wacr.  Gin
ycastafn byep allfxgyn acy-ibgsp aq gin ycigsy kapo.  Kyiiys estyp ibec
iby hbewy, hbany fxxys jeh gn qfscgnbyp acwo hgib hbewykacy, gi gn
nfxxwgyp hgib ihycio-qgvy wesry ifndn, ekafi ygrbi gclbyn wacr,
lowgcpsglew ecp lacglew ei iby iax, yelb hygrbgcr iha xafcpn.  Gi gn gc
iby fxxys xesi aq ibgn ycastafn byep, gc rsyei levgigyn pgvgpyp ko
lesigweryn, ibei gn ia ky qafcp qsat ngm ia ygrbi bfcpsyp xafcpn aq
ibei xsylgafn agw lewwyp nxystelyig.  Iby lelbewai gn e pgnersyyekwy
lsyeifsy, tasy iepxawy ibec qgnb, ellaspgcr ia Qsypaw'n pynlsgxigac.
Gi gn kepwo qastyp, iby hbawy aq gin wyqi ngpy kygcr (gq hy teo neo
gi), e "qegwfsy," ecp kygcr acwo ekwy ia nyy hgib gin sgrbi yoy.  Kfi
iby qastgpekwy isaax hen cyesgcr fn.  Ibyo bep nyyc iby hbewyn ecp hysy
xsyxesgcr ia eiield ibyt.  Acy lafwp jfpry kyqasybecp ibei iby
lelbewain hafwp ky vgliasgafn, cai acwo kylefny ibyo hysy kyiiys kfgwi
qas eiield ibec ibygs gcaqqycngvy epvysnesgyn, kfi ewna kylefny ibyo
lafwp sytegc wacrys fcpys heiys hgibafi latgcr ia iby nfsqely.  Ibysy
hen acwo jfni igty ia ra ia iby bywx aq iby hbewyn.  Iby Cefigwfn hyci
fcpys heiys.  Lacnygw, Cyp Wecp, ecp G iaad afs xwelyn kyqasy iby
hgcpah gc iby newaac, ecp Lexiegc Cyta jagcyp iby xgwai gc bgn lery ia
hasd bgn exxeseifn en ec ycrgcy aq pynisfligac.  Naac G qywi iby
kyeigcrn aq iby nlsyh zfgldyc, ecp afs nxyyp gclsyenyp.  Iby keiiwy
kyihyyc iby lelbewain ecp iby hbewyn bep ewsyepo kyrfc hbyc iby
Cefigwfn essgvyp.  Ibyo pgp cai ei qgsni nbah eco qyes ei iby ngrbi aq
ibgn cyh tacniys jagcgcr gc iby lacqwgli.  Kfi ibyo naac bep ia rfesp
eregcni gin kwahn.  Hbei e keiiwy!  Iby Cefigwfn hen caibgcr kfi e
qastgpekwy besxaac, ksecpgnbyp ko iby becp aq gin Lexiegc.  Gi bfswyp
ginywq eregcni iby qwynbo tenn, xenngcr ibsafrb qsat acy xesi ia iby
aibys, wyevgcr kybgcp gi iha zfgvysgcr bewvyn aq iby ecgtew.  Gi lafwp
cai qyyw iby qastgpekwy kwahn qsat ibygs iegwn fxac gin ngpyn, cas iby
nbald hbglb gi xsapflyp ginywq, tflb tasy.  Acy lelbewai dgwwyp, gi sec
ei iby cymi, ieldyp ac iby nxai ibei gi tgrbi cai tgnn gin xsyo, ragcr
qashespn ecp keldhespn, ecnhysgcr ia gin bywt, xwfcrgcr hbyc iby
lyielyec pgvyp gcia iby pyyx heiysn, latgcr fx hgib gi hbyc gi syifscyp
ia iby nfsqely, nisgdgcr gi qsaci as ngpyheon, lfiigcr as iyesgcr gc
eww pgsyligacn ecp ei eco xely, xgyslgcr gi hgib gin iyssgkwy nxfs.
Hbei lescery!  Hbei e cagny ac iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn!  Hbei nbesx
bgnngcr, ecp hbei ncasigcr xylfwges ia ibyny ycseryp ecgtewn!  Gc iby
tgpni aq ibyny heiysn, rycysewwo na xyelyqfw, ibygs iegwn tepy xysqyli
kgwwahn.  Qas acy bafs ibgn hbawynewy tennelsy lacigcfyp, qsat hbglb
iby lelbewain lafwp cai ynlexy.  Nyvysew igtyn iyc as ihywvy fcgiyp
isgyp ia lsfnb iby Cefigwfn ko ibygs hygrbi.  Qsat iby hgcpah hy lafwp
nyy ibygs ycastafn tafibn, nifppyp hgib ifndn, ecp ibygs qastgpekwy
yoyn.  Cyp Wecp lafwp cai laciegc bgtnywq; by ibsyeiycyp ecp nhasy ei
ibyt.  Hy lafwp qyyw ibyt lwgcrgcr ia afs vynnyw wgdy parn hassogcr e
hgwp kaes gc e laxny.  Kfi iby Cefigwfn, hasdgcr gin nlsyh, lessgyp
ibyt bysy ecp ibysy, as ia iby fxxys wyvywn aq iby alyec, hgibafi
lesgcr qas ibygs ycastafn hygrbi, cas iby xahysqfw nisegc ac iby
vynnyw.  Ei wycrib iby tenn aq lelbewain ksady fx, iby hevyn kylety
zfgyi, ecp G qywi ibei hy hysy sgngcr ia iby nfsqely.  Iby xecyw
axycyp, ecp hy bfssgyp ac ia iby xweiqast.  Iby nye hen lavysyp hgib
tfigweiyp kapgyn.  E qastgpekwy ymxwangac lafwp cai bevy pgvgpyp ecp
iasc ibgn qwynbo tenn hgib tasy vgawycly.  Hy hysy qwaeigcr etgp
rgrecigl kapgyn, kwfgnb ac iby keld ecp hbgiy fcpyscyeib, lavysyp hgib
ycastafn xsaifkyseclyn.  Naty iyssgqgyp lelbewain hysy qwogcr iahespn
iby basguac.  Iby hevyn hysy poyp syp qas nyvysew tgwyn, ecp iby
Cefigwfn qwaeiyp gc e nye aq kwaap:  Lexiegc Cyta jagcyp fn.

"Hyww, Teniys Wecp?" negp by.

"Hyww, ngs," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, hbany ycibfngent bep natyhbei
lewtyp; "gi gn e iyssgkwy nxylielwy, lysiegcwo.  Kfi G et cai e
kfilbys.  G et e bfciys, ecp G leww ibgn e kfilbyso."

"Gi gn e tennelsy aq tgnlbgyvafn lsyeifsyn," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc; "ecp
iby Cefigwfn gn cai e kfilbys'n dcgqy."

"G wgdy to besxaac kyiiys," negp iby Lecepgec.

"Yvyso acy ia bgn ahc," ecnhysyp iby Lexiegc, waadgcr qgmypwo ei Cyp
Wecp.

G qyesyp by hafwp lattgi naty eli aq vgawycly, hbglb hafwp ycp gc nep
lacnyzfyclyn.  Kfi bgn ecrys hen ifscyp ko iby ngrbi aq e hbewy hbglb
iby Cefigwfn bep jfni laty fx hgib.  Iby lsyeifsy bep cai zfgiy ynlexyp
qsat iby lelbewai'n iyyib.  G sylarcgnyp iby nafibysc hbewy ko gin qwei
byep, hbglb gn ycigsywo kweld.  Eceiatglewwo, gi gn pgnigcrfgnbyp qsat
iby hbgiy hbewy ecp iby Casib Lexy hbewy ko iby nyvyc lysvglew
vysiyksey, ecp gi ben iha tasy sgkn ibec gin lacrycysn.  Iby
fcqasifceiy lyielyec hen wogcr ac gin ngpy, sgppwyp hgib bawyn qsat iby
kgiyn, ecp zfgiy pyep.  Qsat gin tfigweiyp qgc nigww bfcr e oafcr hbewy
hbglb gi lafwp cai nevy qsat iby tennelsy.  Gin axyc tafib wyi iby
heiys qwah gc ecp afi, tfstfsgcr wgdy iby hevyn ksyedgcr ac iby nbasy.
Lexiegc Cyta niyysyp lwany ia iby lasxny aq iby lsyeifsy.  Iha aq bgn
tyc tafciyp gin ngpy, ecp G neh, cai hgibafi nfsxsgny, ibei ibyo hysy
psehgcr qsat gin ksyenin eww iby tgwd hbglb ibyo laciegcyp, ibei gn ia
neo, ekafi iha as ibsyy iacn.  Iby Lexiegc aqqysyp ty e lfx aq iby
tgwd, hbglb hen nigww hest.  G lafwp cai bywx nbahgcr to syxfrcecly ia
iby psgcd; kfi by ennfsyp ty ibei gi hen ymlywwyci, ecp cai ia ky
pgnigcrfgnbyp qsat lah'n tgwd.  G ieniyp gi, ecp hen aq bgn axgcgac.
Gi hen e fnyqfw synysvy ia fn, qas gc iby nbexy aq newi kfiiys as
lbyyny gi hafwp qast ec ersyyekwy vesgyio qsat afs aspgceso qaap.  Qsat
ibei peo G caiglyp hgib fcyengcynn ibei Cyp Wecp'n gww-hgww iahespn
Lexiegc Cyta gclsyenyp, ecp G synawvyp ia heilb iby Lecepgec'n rynifsyn
lwanywo.



LBEXIYS MGGG

IBY GLYKYSR

Iby Cefigwfn hen niyepgwo xfsnfgcr gin nafibyswo lafsny, qawwahgcr iby
qgqigyib tysgpgec hgib lacngpysekwy nxyyp.  Pgp by hgnb ia syelb iby
xawy?  G pgp cai ibgcd na, qas yvyso eiiytxi ia syelb ibei xagci bep
bgibysia qegwyp.  Eregc, iby nyenac hen qes epveclyp, qas gc iby
Eciesligl syrgacn iby 13ib aq Teslb lassynxacpn hgib iby 13ib aq
Nyxiytkys aq casibysc syrgacn, hbglb kyrgc ei iby yzfgcaligew nyenac.
Ac iby 14ib aq Teslb G neh qwaeigcr gly gc weigifpy 55°, tysywo
xewy kgin aq pyksgn qsat ihycio ia ihycio-qgvy qyyi wacr, qastgcr kecdn
avys hbglb iby nye lfswyp.  Iby Cefigwfn sytegcyp ac iby nfsqely aq iby
alyec.  Cyp Wecp, hba bep qgnbyp gc iby Esligl Nyen, hen qetgwges hgib
gin glykysrn; kfi Lacnygw ecp G eptgsyp ibyt qas iby qgsni igty.  Gc
iby eitanxbysy iahespn iby nafibysc basguac nisyilbyp e hbgiy peuuwgcr
kecp.  Ycrwgnb hbewysn bevy rgvyc gi iby cety aq "gly kwgcd."  Bahyvys
ibgld iby lwafpn teo ky, gi gn ewheon vgngkwy, ecp eccafclyn iby
xsynycly aq ec gly xeld as kecd.  Ellaspgcrwo, wesrys kwaldn naac
exxyesyp, hbany ksgwwgeclo lbecryp hgib iby lexsglyn aq iby qar.  Naty
aq ibyny tennyn nbahyp rsyyc vygcn, en gq wacr fcpfweigcr wgcyn bep
kyyc iselyp hgib nfwxbeiy aq laxxys; aibysn synytkwyp ycastafn
etyibonin hgib iby wgrbi nbgcgcr ibsafrb ibyt.  Naty syqwyliyp iby
wgrbi aq peo fxac e ibafnecp lsoniew qelyin.  Aibysn nbepyp hgib vgvgp
lewlesyafn syqwyligacn synytkwyp e xysqyli iahc aq teskwy.  Iby tasy hy
cyesyp iby nafib iby tasy ibyny qwaeigcr gnwecpn gclsyenyp kaib gc
cftkys ecp gtxasiecly.

Ei 60° wei. yvyso xenn bep pgnexxyesyp.  Kfi, nyydgcr lesyqfwwo,
Lexiegc Cyta naac qafcp e cessah axycgcr, ibsafrb hbglb by kawpwo
nwgxxyp, dcahgcr, bahyvys, ibei gi hafwp lwany kybgcp bgt.  Ibfn,
rfgpyp ko ibgn lwyvys becp, iby Cefigwfn xennyp ibsafrb eww iby gly
hgib e xsylgngac hbglb zfgiy lbestyp Lacnygw; glykysrn as tafciegcn,
gly-qgywpn as ntaaib xwegcn, nyytgcr ia bevy ca wgtgin, psgqi-gly as
qwaeigcr gly-xeldn, xwegcn ksadyc fx, lewwyp xewlbn hbyc ibyo esy
lgslfwes, ecp nisyetn hbyc ibyo esy tepy fx aq wacr nisgxn.  Iby
iytxyseifsy hen vyso wah; iby ibystatyiys ymxanyp ia iby egs tesdyp 2
pyr. as 3° kywah uysa, kfi hy hysy hestwo lwep hgib qfs, ei iby
ymxycny aq iby nye-kyes ecp nyew.  Iby gciysgas aq iby Cefigwfn, hestyp
syrfweswo ko gin ywylisgl exxeseifn, pyqgyp iby tani gciycny lawp.
Kyngpyn, gi hafwp acwo bevy kyyc cylynneso ia ra naty oespn kycyeib iby
hevyn ia qgcp e tasy kyesekwy iytxyseifsy.  Iha tacibn yeswgys hy
nbafwp bevy bep xysxyifew peowgrbi gc ibyny weigifpyn; kfi ewsyepo hy
bep bep ibsyy as qafs bafsn aq cgrbi, ecp ko ecp ko ibysy hafwp ky ngm
tacibn aq pesdcynn gc ibyny lgslftxawes syrgacn.  Ac iby 15ib aq Teslb
hy hysy gc iby weigifpy aq Cyh Nbyiwecp ecp Nafib Asdcyo.  Iby Lexiegc
iawp ty ibei qastyswo cftysafn isgkyn aq nyewn gcbekgiyp ibyt; kfi ibei
Ycrwgnb ecp Etysglec hbewysn, gc ibygs sery qas pynisfligac, tennelsyp
kaib awp ecp oafcr; ibfn, hbysy ibysy hen acly wgqy ecp ecgteigac, ibyo
bep wyqi ngwycly ecp pyeib.

Ekafi ygrbi a'lwald ac iby tascgcr aq iby 16ib aq Teslb iby Cefigwfn,
qawwahgcr iby qgqio-qgqib tysgpgec, lfi iby Eciesligl xawes lgslwy.
Gly nfssafcpyp fn ac eww ngpyn, ecp lwanyp iby basguac.  Kfi Lexiegc
Cyta hyci qsat acy axycgcr ia ecaibys, nigww ragcr bgrbys.  G leccai
ymxsynn to eniacgnbtyci ei iby kyefigyn aq ibyny cyh syrgacn.  Iby gly
iaad tani nfsxsgngcr qastn.  Bysy iby rsafxgcr qastyp ec asgyciew iahc,
hgib gccftysekwy tanzfyn ecp tgcesyin; ibysy e qewwyc lgio ibsahc ia
iby yesib, en gi hysy, ko naty lacvfwngac aq ceifsy.  Iby hbawy enxyli
hen lacnieciwo lbecryp ko iby akwgzfy seon aq iby nfc, as wani gc iby
rsyognb qar etgpni bfssglecyn aq ncah.  Pyiaceigacn ecp qewwn hysy
byesp ac eww ngpyn, rsyei avysibsahn aq glykysrn, hbglb ewiysyp iby
hbawy wecpnlexy wgdy e pgasete.  Aqiyc nyygcr ca ymgi, G ibafrbi hy
hysy pyqgcgiywo xsgnacysn; kfi, gcnigcli rfgpgcr bgt ei iby nwgrbiyni
gcpgleigac, Lexiegc Cyta hafwp pgnlavys e cyh xenn.  By hen cyvys
tgniedyc hbyc by neh iby ibgc ibsyepn aq kwfgnb heiys isgldwgcr ewacr
iby gly-qgywpn; ecp G bep ca pafki ibei by bep ewsyepo vycifsyp gcia
iby tgpni aq ibyny Eciesligl nyen kyqasy.  Ac iby 16ib aq Teslb,
bahyvys, iby gly-qgywpn eknawfiywo kwaldyp afs saep.  Gi hen cai iby
glykysr ginywq, en oyi, kfi veni qgywpn lytyciyp ko iby lawp.  Kfi ibgn
aknielwy lafwp cai niax Lexiegc Cyta: by bfswyp bgtnywq eregcni gi hgib
qsgrbiqfw vgawycly.  Iby Cefigwfn yciysyp iby ksgiiwy tenn wgdy e
hypry, ecp nxwgi gi hgib qsgrbiqfw lseldgcrn.  Gi hen iby keiiysgcr set
aq iby eclgycin bfswyp ko gcqgcgiy nisycrib.  Iby gly, ibsahc bgrb gc
iby egs, qyww wgdy begw esafcp fn.  Ko gin ahc xahys aq gtxfwngac afs
exxeseifn tepy e lecew qas ginywq; naty igtyn lessgyp eheo ko gin ahc
gtxyifn, gi wapryp ac iby gly-qgywp, lsfnbgcr gi hgib gin hygrbi, ecp
natyigtyn kfsgyp kycyeib gi, pgvgpgcr gi ko e ngtxwy xgilbgcr tavytyci,
xsapflgcr wesry sycin gc gi.  Vgawyci rewyn ennegwyp fn ei ibgn igty,
ellatxecgyp ko ibgld qarn, ibsafrb hbglb, qsat acy ycp aq iby xweiqast
ia iby aibys, hy lafwp nyy caibgcr.  Iby hgcp kwyh nbesxwo qsat eww
xesin aq iby latxenn, ecp iby ncah weo gc nflb besp byexn ibei hy bep
ia ksyed gi hgib kwahn aq e xgldemy.  Iby iytxyseifsy hen ewheon ei 5
pyr. kywah uysa; yvyso afihesp xesi aq iby Cefigwfn hen lavysyp hgib
gly.  E sgrryp vynnyw hafwp bevy kyyc yciecrwyp gc iby kwaldyp fx
rasryn.  E vynnyw hgibafi negwn, hgib ywylisglgio qas gin taigvy xahys,
ecp hecigcr ca laew, lafwp ewacy ksevy nflb bgrb weigifpyn.  Ei wycrib,
ac iby 18ib aq Teslb, eqiys teco fnywynn ennefwin, iby Cefigwfn hen
xangigvywo kwaldyp.  Gi hen ca wacrys ygibys nisyetn, xeldn, as
gly-qgywpn, kfi ec gciystgcekwy ecp gttavekwy kessgys, qastyp ko
tafciegcn nawpysyp iaryibys.

"Ec glykysr!" negp iby Lecepgec ia ty.

G dcyh ibei ia Cyp Wecp, en hyww en ia eww aibys cevgreiasn hba bep
xsylypyp fn, ibgn hen ec gcyvgiekwy aknielwy.  Iby nfc exxyesgcr qas ec
gcnieci ei caac, Lexiegc Cyta iaad ec aknysveigac en cyes en xanngkwy,
hbglb revy afs ngifeigac ei 51° 30' wacr. ecp 67° 39' aq N.
wei.  Hy bep epveclyp acy pyrsyy tasy gc ibgn Eciesligl syrgac.  Aq iby
wgzfgp nfsqely aq iby nye ibysy hen ca wacrys e rwgtxny.  Fcpys iby
nxfs aq iby Cefigwfn weo nisyilbyp e veni xwegc, yciecrwyp hgib
lacqfnyp kwaldn.  Bysy ecp ibysy nbesx xagcin ecp nwycpys cyypwyn
sgngcr ia e bygrbi aq 200 qyyi; qfsibys ac e niyyx nbasy, byhc en gi
hysy hgib ec emy ecp lwaibyp hgib rsyognb igcin; bfry tgssasn,
syqwyligcr e qyh seon aq nfcnbgcy, bewq psahcyp gc iby qar.  Ecp avys
ibgn pynaweiy qely aq ceifsy e niysc ngwycly sygrcyp, nleslywo ksadyc
ko iby qwexxgcr aq iby hgcrn aq xyisywn ecp xfqqgcn.  Yvysoibgcr hen
qsauyc--yvyc iby cagny.  Iby Cefigwfn hen ibyc akwgryp ia niax gc gin
epvycifsafn lafsny etgp ibyny qgywpn aq gly.  Gc nxgiy aq afs yqqasin,
gc nxgiy aq iby xahysqfw tyecn ytxwaoyp ia ksyed fx iby gly, iby
Cefigwfn sytegcyp gttavekwy.  Rycysewwo, hbyc hy lec xsalyyp ca
qfsibys, hy bevy syifsc nigww axyc ia fn; kfi bysy syifsc hen en
gtxanngkwy en epvecly, qas yvyso xenn bep lwanyp kybgcp fn; ecp qas iby
qyh tatycin hbyc hy hysy nieigaceso, hy hysy wgdywo ia ky ycigsywo
kwaldyp, hbglb pgp gcpyyp bexxyc ekafi iha a'lwald gc iby eqiyscaac,
iby qsynb gly qastgcr esafcp gin ngpyn hgib eniacgnbgcr sexgpgio.  G
hen akwgryp ia eptgi ibei Lexiegc Cyta hen tasy ibec gtxsfpyci.  G hen
ac iby xweiqast ei ibei tatyci.  Iby Lexiegc bep kyyc aknysvgcr afs
ngifeigac qas naty igty xeni, hbyc by negp ia ty:

"Hyww, ngs, hbei pa oaf ibgcd aq ibgn?"

"G ibgcd ibei hy esy lefrbi, Lexiegc."

"Na, T. Esaccem, oaf syewwo ibgcd ibei iby Cefigwfn leccai pgnycrery
ginywq?"

"Hgib pgqqglfwio, Lexiegc; qas iby nyenac gn ewsyepo iaa qes epveclyp
qas oaf ia syldac ac iby ksyedgcr aq iby gly."

"Eb! ngs," negp Lexiegc Cyta, gc ec gsacglew iacy, "oaf hgww ewheon ky
iby nety.  Oaf nyy caibgcr kfi pgqqglfwigyn ecp aknielwyn.  G eqqgst
ibei cai acwo lec iby Cefigwfn pgnycrery ginywq, kfi ewna ibei gi lec
ra qfsibys nigww."

"Qfsibys ia iby Nafib?"  G endyp, waadgcr ei iby Lexiegc.

"Oyn, ngs; gi nbeww ra ia iby xawy."

"Ia iby xawy!"  G ymlwegtyp, fcekwy ia syxsynn e rynifsy aq gclsypfwgio.

"Oyn," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc, lawpwo, "ia iby Eciesligl xawy--ia ibei
fcdcahc xagci qsat hbycly nxsgcrn yvyso tysgpgec aq iby rwaky.  Oaf
dcah hbyibys G lec pa en G xwyeny hgib iby Cefigwfn!"

Oyn, G dcyh ibei.  G dcyh ibei ibgn tec hen kawp, yvyc ia senbcynn.
Kfi ia laczfys ibany aknielwyn hbglb ksgniwyp safcp iby Nafib Xawy,
sycpysgcr gi tasy gcellynngkwy ibec iby Casib, hbglb bep cai oyi kyyc
syelbyp ko iby kawpyni cevgreiasn--hen gi cai e tep yciysxsgny, acy
hbglb acwo e tecgel hafwp bevy laclygvyp?  Gi ibyc lety gcia to byep ia
end Lexiegc Cyta gq by bep yvys pgnlavysyp ibei xawy hbglb bep cyvys
oyi kyyc isappyc ko e bftec lsyeifsy?

"Ca, ngs," by syxwgyp; "kfi hy hgww pgnlavys gi iaryibys.  Hbysy aibysn
bevy qegwyp, G hgww cai qegw.  G bevy cyvys oyi wyp to Cefigwfn na qes
gcia nafibysc nyen; kfi, G syxyei, gi nbeww ra qfsibys oyi."

"G lec hyww kywgyvy oaf, Lexiegc," negp G, gc e nwgrbiwo gsacglew iacy.
"G kywgyvy oaf!  Wyi fn ra ebyep!  Ibysy esy ca aknielwyn qas fn!  Wyi
fn ntenb ibgn glykysr!  Wyi fn kwah gi fx; ecp, gq gi syngnin, wyi fn
rgvy iby Cefigwfn hgcrn ia qwo avys gi!"

"Avys gi, ngs!" negp Lexiegc Cyta, zfgyiwo; "ca, cai avys gi, kfi fcpys
gi!"

"Fcpys gi!"  G ymlwegtyp, e nfppyc gpye aq iby Lexiegc'n xsajylin
qwenbgcr fxac to tgcp.  G fcpysniaap; iby hacpysqfw zfewgigyn aq iby
Cefigwfn hysy ragcr ia nysvy fn gc ibgn nfxysbftec yciysxsgny.

"G nyy hy esy kyrgccgcr ia fcpysniecp acy ecaibys, ngs," negp iby
Lexiegc, bewq ntgwgcr.  "Oaf kyrgc ia nyy iby xanngkgwgio--G nbafwp neo
iby nfllynn--aq ibgn eiiytxi.  Ibei hbglb gn gtxanngkwy qas ec aspgceso
vynnyw gn yeno ia iby Cefigwfn.  Gq e lacigcyci wgyn kyqasy iby xawy,
gi tfni niax kyqasy iby lacigcyci; kfi gq, ac iby laciseso, iby xawy gn
henbyp ko axyc nye, gi hgww ra yvyc ia iby xawy."

"Lysiegcwo," negp G, lessgyp eheo ko iby Lexiegc'n syenacgcr; "gq iby
nfsqely aq iby nye gn nawgpgqgyp ko iby gly, iby wahys pyxibn esy qsyy
ko iby Xsavgpycigew weh hbglb ben xwelyp iby temgtft aq pycngio aq iby
heiysn aq iby alyec acy pyrsyy bgrbys ibec qsyyugcr-xagci; ecp, gq G et
cai tgniedyc, iby xasigac aq ibgn glykysr hbglb gn ekavy iby heiys gn
en acy ia qafs ia ibei hbglb gn kywah."

"Vyso cyeswo, ngs; qas acy qaai aq glykysr ekavy iby nye ibysy esy
ibsyy kywah gi.  Gq ibyny gly tafciegcn esy cai tasy ibec 300 qyyi
ekavy iby nfsqely, ibyo esy cai tasy ibec 900 kycyeib.  Ecp hbei esy
900 qyyi ia iby Cefigwfn?"

"Caibgcr, ngs."

"Gi lafwp yvyc nyyd ei rsyeiys pyxibn ibei fcgqast iytxyseifsy aq
nye-heiys, ecp ibysy ksevy hgib gtxfcgio iby ibgsio as qasio pyrsyyn aq
nfsqely lawp."

"Jfni na, ngs--jfni na," G syxwgyp, ryiigcr ecgteiyp.

"Iby acwo pgqqglfwio," lacigcfyp Lexiegc Cyta, "gn ibei aq sytegcgcr
nyvysew peon hgibafi sycyhgcr afs xsavgngac aq egs."

"Gn ibei eww?  Iby Cefigwfn ben veni synysvagsn; hy lec qgww ibyt, ecp
ibyo hgww nfxxwo fn hgib eww iby amoryc hy heci."

"Hyww ibafrbi aq, T. Esaccem," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc, ntgwgcr.  "Kfi, cai
hgnbgcr oaf ia ellfny ty aq senbcynn, G hgww qgsni rgvy oaf eww to
akjyligacn."

"Bevy oaf eco tasy ia tedy?"

"Acwo acy.  Gi gn xanngkwy, gq iby nye ymgnin ei iby Nafib Xawy, ibei
gi teo ky lavysyp; ecp, lacnyzfyciwo, hy nbeww ky fcekwy ia laty ia iby
nfsqely."

"Raap, ngs! kfi pa oaf qasryi ibei iby Cefigwfn gn estyp hgib e
xahysqfw nxfs, ecp lafwp hy cai nycp gi pgeracewwo eregcni ibyny qgywpn
aq gly, hbglb hafwp axyc ei iby nbaldn."

"Eb! ngs, oaf esy qfww aq gpyen ia-peo."

"Kyngpyn, Lexiegc," G eppyp, ycibfngeniglewwo, "hbo nbafwp hy cai qgcp
iby nye axyc ei iby Nafib Xawy en hyww en ei iby Casib?  Iby qsauyc
xawyn aq iby yesib pa cai lagclgpy, ygibys gc iby nafibysc as gc iby
casibysc syrgacn; ecp, fcigw gi gn xsavyp ia iby laciseso, hy teo
nfxxany ygibys e lacigcyci as ec alyec qsyy qsat gly ei ibyny iha
xagcin aq iby rwaky."

"G ibgcd na iaa, T. Esaccem," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta.  "G acwo hgnb oaf
ia aknysvy ibei, eqiys bevgcr tepy na teco akjyligacn ia to xsajyli,
oaf esy cah lsfnbgcr ty hgib esrftycin gc gin qevafs!"

Iby xsyxeseigacn qas ibgn efpelgafn eiiytxi cah kyrec.  Iby xahysqfw
xftxn aq iby Cefigwfn hysy hasdgcr egs gcia iby synysvagsn ecp niasgcr
gi ei bgrb xsynnfsy.  Ekafi qafs a'lwald, Lexiegc Cyta eccafclyp iby
lwangcr aq iby xecywn ac iby xweiqast.  G ibsyh acy weni waad ei iby
tenngvy glykysr hbglb hy hysy ragcr ia lsann.  Iby hyeibys hen lwyes,
iby eitanxbysy xfsy ycafrb, iby lawp vyso rsyei, kygcr 12° kywah
uysa; kfi, iby hgcp bevgcr racy pahc, ibgn iytxyseifsy hen cai na
fckyesekwy.  Ekafi iyc tyc tafciyp iby ngpyn aq iby Cefigwfn, estyp
hgib xgldemyn ia ksyed iby gly esafcp iby vynnyw, hbglb hen naac qsyy.
Iby axyseigac hen zfgldwo xysqastyp, qas iby qsynb gly hen nigww vyso
ibgc.  Hy eww hyci kywah.  Iby fnfew synysvagsn hysy qgwwyp hgib iby
cyhwo-wgkyseiyp heiys, ecp iby Cefigwfn naac pynlycpyp.  G bep iedyc to
xwely hgib Lacnygw gc iby newaac; ibsafrb iby axyc hgcpah hy lafwp nyy
iby wahys kypn aq iby Nafibysc Alyec.  Iby ibystatyiys hyci fx, iby
cyypwy aq iby latxenn pyvgeiyp ac iby pgew.  Ei ekafi 900 qyyi, en
Lexiegc Cyta bep qasynyyc, hy hysy qwaeigcr kycyeib iby fcpfweigcr
kaiiat aq iby glykysr.  Kfi iby Cefigwfn hyci wahys nigww--gi hyci ia
iby pyxib aq qafs bfcpsyp qeibatn.  Iby iytxyseifsy aq iby heiys ei iby
nfsqely nbahyp ihywvy pyrsyyn, gi hen cah acwo iyc; hy bep regcyp iha.
G cyyp cai neo iby iytxyseifsy aq iby Cefigwfn hen segnyp ko gin
byeigcr exxeseifn ia e tflb bgrbys pyrsyy; yvyso tecayfvsy hen
ellatxwgnbyp hgib hacpysqfw xsylgngac.

"Hy nbeww xenn gi, gq oaf xwyeny, ngs," negp Lacnygw.

"G kywgyvy hy nbeww," G negp, gc e iacy aq qgst lacvgligac.

Gc ibgn axyc nye, iby Cefigwfn bep iedyc gin lafsny pgsyli ia iby xawy,
hgibafi wyevgcr iby qgqio-nylacp tysgpgec.  Qsat 67° 30' ia 90
pyr., ihycio-iha pyrsyyn ecp e bewq aq weigifpy sytegcyp ia isevyw;
ibei gn, ekafi qgvy bfcpsyp wyerfyn.  Iby Cefigwfn dyxi fx e tyec nxyyp
aq ihycio-ngm tgwyn ec bafs--iby nxyyp aq ec ymxsynn isegc.  Gq ibei
hen dyxi fx, gc qasio bafsn hy nbafwp syelb iby xawy.

Qas e xesi aq iby cgrbi iby cavywio aq iby ngifeigac dyxi fn ei iby
hgcpah.  Iby nye hen wgi hgib iby ywylisgl weciysc; kfi gi hen
pynysiyp; qgnbyn pgp cai najafsc gc ibyny gtxsgnacyp heiysn; ibyo acwo
qafcp ibysy e xennery ia iedy ibyt qsat iby Eciesligl Alyec ia iby axyc
xawes nye.  Afs xely hen sexgp; hy lafwp qyyw gi ko iby zfgvysgcr aq
iby wacr niyyw kapo.  Ekafi iha gc iby tascgcr G iaad naty bafsn'
syxany, ecp Lacnygw pgp iby nety.  Gc lsanngcr iby hegni G pgp cai tyyi
Lexiegc Cyta: G nfxxanyp bgt ia ky gc iby xgwai'n lery.  Iby cymi
tascgcr, iby 19ib aq Teslb, G iaad to xani acly tasy gc iby newaac.
Iby ywylisgl war iawp ty ibei iby nxyyp aq iby Cefigwfn bep kyyc
nweldycyp.  Gi hen ibyc ragcr iahespn iby nfsqely; kfi xsfpyciwo
ytxiogcr gin synysvagsn vyso nwahwo.  To byesi kyei qeni.  Hysy hy
ragcr ia ytysry ecp syregc iby axyc xawes eitanxbysy?  Ca!  E nbald
iawp ty ibei iby Cefigwfn bep nisfld iby kaiiat aq iby glykysr, nigww
vyso ibgld, jfprgcr qsat iby pyepycyp nafcp.  Hy bep gc pyyp "nisfld,"
ia fny e nye ymxsynngac, kfi gc ec gcvysny nycny, ecp ei e ibafnecp
qyyi pyyx.  Ibgn hafwp rgvy ibsyy ibafnecp qyyi aq gly ekavy fn; acy
ibafnecp kygcr ekavy iby heiys-tesd. Iby glykysr hen ibyc bgrbys ibec
ei gin kaspysn--cai e vyso syennfsgcr qeli.  Nyvysew igtyn ibei peo iby
Cefigwfn isgyp eregc, ecp yvyso igty gi nisfld iby heww hbglb weo wgdy
e lygwgcr ekavy gi.  Natyigtyn gi tyi hgib kfi 900 oespn, acwo 200 aq
hbglb sany ekavy iby nfsqely.  Gi hen ihgly iby bygrbi gi hen hbyc iby
Cefigwfn bep racy fcpys iby hevyn.  G lesyqfwwo caiyp iby pgqqysyci
pyxibn, ecp ibfn akiegcyp e nfktesgcy xsaqgwy aq iby lbegc en gi hen
pyvywaxyp fcpys iby heiys.  Ibei cgrbi ca lbecry bep iedyc xwely gc afs
ngifeigac.  Nigww gly kyihyyc qafs ecp qgvy bfcpsyp oespn gc pyxib!  Gi
hen yvgpyciwo pgtgcgnbgcr, kfi, nigww, hbei e ibgldcynn kyihyyc fn ecp
iby nfsqely aq iby alyec!  Gi hen ibyc ygrbi.  Ellaspgcr ia iby pegwo
lfniat ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn, gin egs nbafwp bevy kyyc sycyhyp qafs
bafsn era; kfi G pgp cai nfqqys tflb, ewibafrb Lexiegc Cyta bep cai oyi
tepy eco pytecp fxac bgn synysvy aq amoryc.  To nwyyx hen xegcqfw ibei
cgrbi; baxy ecp qyes kyngyryp ty ko ifscn: G sany nyvysew igtyn.  Iby
rsaxgcr aq iby Cefigwfn lacigcfyp.  Ekafi ibsyy gc iby tascgcr, G
caiglyp ibei iby wahys nfsqely aq iby glykysr hen acwo ekafi qgqio qyyi
pyyx.  Acy bfcpsyp ecp qgqio qyyi cah nyxeseiyp fn qsat iby nfsqely aq
iby heiysn.  Iby glykysr hen ko pyrsyyn kylatgcr ec gly-qgywp, iby
tafciegc e xwegc.  To yoyn cyvys wyqi iby tecatyiys.  Hy hysy nigww
sgngcr pgeracewwo ia iby nfsqely, hbglb nxesdwyp fcpys iby ywylisgl
seon.  Iby glykysr hen nisyilbgcr kaib ekavy ecp kycyeib gcia
wycribycgcr nwaxyn; tgwy eqiys tgwy gi hen ryiigcr ibgccys.  Ei wycrib,
ei ngm gc iby tascgcr aq ibei tytasekwy peo, iby 19ib aq Teslb, iby
paas aq iby newaac axycyp, ecp Lexiegc Cyta exxyesyp.

"Iby nye gn axyc!!" hen eww by negp.



LBEXIYS MGV

IBY NAFIB XAWY

G sfnbyp ac ia iby xweiqast.  Oyn! iby axyc nye, hgib kfi e qyh
nleiiysyp xgylyn aq gly ecp tavgcr glykysrn--e wacr nisyilb aq nye; e
haswp aq kgspn gc iby egs, ecp tosgepn aq qgnbyn fcpys ibany heiysn,
hbglb vesgyp qsat gciycny kwfy ia awgvy rsyyc, ellaspgcr ia iby kaiiat.
Iby ibystatyiys tesdyp 3° L. ekavy uysa.  Gi hen latxeseigvywo
nxsgcr, nbfi fx en hy hysy kybgcp ibgn glykysr, hbany wycribycyp tenn
hen pgtwo nyyc ac afs casibysc basguac.

"Esy hy ei iby xawy?"  G endyp iby Lexiegc, hgib e kyeigcr byesi.

"G pa cai dcah," by syxwgyp.  "Ei caac G hgww iedy afs kyesgcrn."

"Kfi hgww iby nfc nbah bgtnywq ibsafrb ibgn qar?" negp G, waadgcr ei
iby wyepyc ndo.

"Bahyvys wgiiwy gi nbahn, gi hgww ky ycafrb," syxwgyp iby Lexiegc.

Ekafi iyc tgwyn nafib e nawgieso gnwecp sany ia e bygrbi aq acy bfcpsyp
ecp qafs oespn.  Hy tepy qas gi, kfi lesyqfwwo, qas iby nye tgrbi ky
nisyhc hgib kecdn.  Acy bafs eqiyshespn hy bep syelbyp gi, iha bafsn
weiys hy bep tepy iby safcp aq gi.  Gi tyenfsyp qafs as qgvy tgwyn gc
lgslftqysycly.  E cessah lecew nyxeseiyp gi qsat e lacngpysekwy nisyilb
aq wecp, xysbexn e lacigcyci, qas hy lafwp cai nyy gin wgtgin.  Iby
ymgniycly aq ibgn wecp nyytyp ia rgvy naty lawafs ia Tefso'n ibyaso.
Iby gcrycgafn Etysglec ben sytesdyp ibei, kyihyyc iby Nafib Xawy ecp
iby ngmigyib xesewwyw, iby nye gn lavysyp hgib qwaeigcr gly aq ycastafn
nguy, hbglb gn cyvys tyi hgib gc iby Casib Eiwecigl.  Qsat ibgn qeli by
ben psehc iby laclwfngac ibei iby Eciesligl Lgslwy yclwanyn
lacngpysekwy lacigcycin, en glykysrn leccai qast gc axyc nye, kfi acwo
ac iby laenin.  Ellaspgcr ia ibyny lewlfweigacn, iby tenn aq gly
nfssafcpgcr iby nafibysc xawy qastn e veni lex, iby lgslftqysycly aq
hbglb tfni ky, ei wyeni, 2,500 tgwyn.  Kfi iby Cefigwfn, qas qyes aq
sfccgcr ersafcp, bep niaxxyp ekafi ibsyy lekwy-wycribn qsat e nisecp
avys hbglb syesyp e nfxysk byex aq saldn.  Iby kaei hen wefclbyp; iby
Lexiegc, iha aq bgn tyc, kyesgcr gcnisftycin, Lacnygw, ecp tonywq hysy
gc gi.  Gi hen iyc gc iby tascgcr.  G bep cai nyyc Cyp Wecp.  Pafkiwynn
iby Lecepgec pgp cai hgnb ia eptgi iby xsynycly aq iby Nafib Xawy.  E
qyh nisadyn aq iby aes ksafrbi fn ia iby necp, hbysy hy sec enbasy.
Lacnygw hen ragcr ia jftx ac ia iby wecp, hbyc G bywp bgt keld.

"Ngs," negp G ia Lexiegc Cyta, "ia oaf kywacrn iby bacafs aq qgsni
nyiigcr qaai ac ibgn wecp."

"Oyn, ngs," negp iby Lexiegc, "ecp gq G pa cai byngieiy ia isyep ibgn
Nafib Xawy, gi gn kylefny, fx ia ibgn igty, ca bftec kygcr ben wyqi e
isely ibysy."

Neogcr ibgn, by jftxyp wgrbiwo ac ia iby necp.  Bgn byesi kyei hgib
ytaigac.  By lwgtkyp e sald, nwaxgcr ia e wgiiwy xsataciaso, ecp ibysy,
hgib bgn estn lsannyp, tfiy ecp taigacwynn, ecp hgib ec yerys waad, by
nyytyp ia iedy xannynngac aq ibyny nafibysc syrgacn.  Eqiys qgvy
tgcfiyn xennyp gc ibgn ylnieno, by ifscyp ia fn.

"Hbyc oaf wgdy, ngs."

G wecpyp, qawwahyp ko Lacnygw, wyevgcr iby iha tyc gc iby kaei.  Qas e
wacr heo iby nagw hen latxanyp aq e syppgnb necpo niacy, natyibgcr wgdy
lsfnbyp ksgld, nlasgey, nisyetn aq weve, ecp xftgly-niacyn. Acy lafwp
cai tgniedy gin vawlecgl asgrgc.  Gc naty xesin, nwgrbi lfswn aq ntady
ytgiiyp e nfwxbfsafn ntyww, xsavgcr ibei iby gciyscew qgsyn bep wani
caibgcr aq ibygs ymxecngvy xahysn, ibafrb, bevgcr lwgtkyp e bgrb
ellwgvgio, G lafwp nyy ca vawleca qas e sepgfn aq nyvysew tgwyn.  Hy
dcah ibei gc ibany Eciesligl lafcisgyn, Jetyn Sann qafcp iha lseiysn,
iby Ysykfn ecp Iyssas, gc qfww eligvgio, ac iby 167ib tysgpgec,
weigifpy 77° 32'. Iby vyryieigac aq ibgn pynaweiy lacigcyci nyytyp
ia ty tflb synisgliyp.  Naty wglbycn weo fxac iby kweld saldn; naty
tglsanlaxgl xwecin, sfpgtycieso pgeiaten, e dgcp aq lywwn xwelyp
kyihyyc iha zfesiu nbywwn; wacr xfsxwy ecp nleswyi hyyp, nfxxasiyp ac
wgiiwy nhgttgcr kweppysn, hbglb iby ksyedgcr aq iby hevyn ksafrbi ia
iby nbasy.  Ibyny lacnigifiyp iby tyersy qwase aq ibgn syrgac.  Iby
nbasy hen nisyhc hgib tawwfnln, wgiiwy tfnnywn, ecp wgtxyin.  G ewna
neh tosgepn aq casibysc lwgan, acy-ecp-e-zfesiys gclbyn wacr, aq hbglb
e hbewy hafwp nhewwah e hbawy haswp ei e tafibqfw; ecp naty xysqyli
nye-kfiiysqwgyn, ecgteigcr iby heiysn ac iby ndgsin aq iby nbasy.

Ibysy exxyesyp ac iby bgrb kaiiatn naty lasew nbsfkn, aq iby dgcp
hbglb, ellaspgcr ia Jetyn Sann, wgvy gc iby Eciesligl nyen ia iby pyxib
aq tasy ibec 1,000 oespn.  Ibyc ibysy hysy wgiiwy dgcrqgnbysn ecp
niesqgnb nifppgcr iby nagw.  Kfi hbysy wgqy ekafcpyp tani hen gc iby
egs.  Ibysy ibafnecpn aq kgspn qwfiiysyp ecp qwyh aq eww dgcpn,
pyeqycgcr fn hgib ibygs lsgyn; aibysn lsahpyp iby sald, waadgcr ei fn
en hy xennyp ko hgibafi qyes, ecp xsynngcr qetgwgeswo lwany ko afs
qyyi.  Ibysy hysy xycrfgcn, na ergwy gc iby heiys, byevo ecp ehdhesp en
ibyo esy ac iby rsafcp; ibyo hysy fiiysgcr besnb lsgyn, e wesry
ennytkwo, nakys gc rynifsy, kfi ymisevereci gc lwetafs.  Ewkeisannyn
xennyp gc iby egs, iby ymxecny aq ibygs hgcrn kygcr ei wyeni qafs oespn
ecp e bewq, ecp jfniwo lewwyp iby vfwifsyn aq iby alyec; naty rgrecigl
xyisywn, ecp naty petgysn, e dgcp aq nteww pfld, iby fcpysxesi aq hbany
kapo gn kweld ecp hbgiy; ibyc ibysy hysy e hbawy nysgyn aq xyisywn,
naty hbgignb, hgib ksahc-kaspysyp hgcrn, aibysn kwfy, xylfwges ia iby
Eciesligl nyen, ecp na agwo, en G iawp Lacnygw, ibei iby gcbekgiecin aq
iby Qyssay Gnwecpn bep caibgcr ia pa kyqasy wgrbigcr ibyt kfi ia xfi e
hgld gc.

"E wgiiwy tasy," negp Lacnygw, "ecp ibyo hafwp ky xysqyli wetxn!  Eqiys
ibei, hy leccai ymxyli Ceifsy ia bevy xsyvgafnwo qfscgnbyp ibyt hgib
hgldn!"

Ekafi bewq e tgwy qesibys ac iby nagw hen sgppwyp hgib sfqqn' cynin, e
nasi aq weogcr-rsafcp, afi aq hbglb teco kgspn hysy gnnfgcr.  Lexiegc
Cyta bep naty bfcpsypn bfciyp.  Ibyo fiiysyp e lso wgdy iby kseogcr aq
ec enn, hysy ekafi iby nguy aq e raany, nweiy-lawafs ac iby kapo, hbgiy
kycyeib, hgib e oywwah wgcy safcp ibygs ibsaein; ibyo ewwahyp
ibytnywvyn ia ky dgwwyp hgib e niacy, cyvys isogcr ia ynlexy.  Kfi iby
qar pgp cai wgqi, ecp ei ywyvyc iby nfc bep cai oyi nbahc ginywq.  Gin
eknycly tepy ty fcyeno.  Hgibafi gi ca aknysveigacn hysy xanngkwy.
Bah, ibyc, lafwp hy pylgpy hbyibys hy bep syelbyp iby xawy?  Hbyc G
syjagcyp Lexiegc Cyta, G qafcp bgt wyecgcr ac e xgyly aq sald, ngwyciwo
heilbgcr iby ndo.  By nyytyp gtxeigyci ecp vymyp.  Kfi hbei hen ia ky
pacy?  Ibgn senb ecp xahysqfw tec lafwp cai lattecp iby nfc en by pgp
iby nye.  Caac essgvyp hgibafi iby ask aq peo nbahgcr ginywq qas ec
gcnieci.  Hy lafwp cai yvyc iyww gin xangigac kybgcp iby lfsiegc aq
qar; ecp naac iby qar ifscyp ia ncah.

"Igww ia-tassah," negp iby Lexiegc, zfgyiwo, ecp hy syifscyp ia iby
Cefigwfn etgp ibyny eitanxbysgl pgnifskeclyn.

Iby iytxyni aq ncah lacigcfyp igww iby cymi peo.  Gi hen gtxanngkwy ia
sytegc ac iby xweiqast.  Qsat iby newaac, hbysy G hen iedgcr caiyn aq
gclgpycin bexxycgcr pfsgcr ibgn ymlfsngac ia iby xawes lacigcyci, G
lafwp byes iby lsgyn aq xyisywn ecp ewkeisannyn nxasigcr gc iby tgpni
aq ibgn vgawyci niast.  Iby Cefigwfn pgp cai sytegc taigacwynn, kfi
ndgsiyp iby laeni, epveclgcr iyc tgwyn tasy ia iby nafib gc iby
bewq-wgrbi wyqi ko iby nfc en gi ndgsiyp iby ypry aq iby basguac.  Iby
cymi peo, iby 20ib aq Teslb, iby ncah bep lyenyp.  Iby lawp hen e
wgiiwy rsyeiys, iby ibystatyiys nbahgcr 2° kywah uysa.  Iby qar
hen sgngcr, ecp G baxyp ibei ibei peo afs aknysveigacn tgrbi ky iedyc.
Lexiegc Cyta cai bevgcr oyi exxyesyp, iby kaei iaad Lacnygw ecp tonywq
ia wecp.  Iby nagw hen nigww aq iby nety vawlecgl ceifsy; yvysohbysy
hysy iselyn aq weve, nlasgey, ecp kenewi; kfi iby lseiys hbglb bep
vatgiyp ibyt G lafwp cai nyy.  Bysy, en wahys pahc, ibgn lacigcyci hen
ewgvy hgib tosgepn aq kgspn.  Kfi ibygs sfwy hen cah pgvgpyp hgib wesry
isaaxn aq nye-tettewn, waadgcr ei fn hgib ibygs naqi yoyn.  Ibysy hysy
nyvysew dgcpn aq nyewn, naty nisyilbyp ac iby yesib, naty ac qwedyn aq
gly, teco ragcr gc ecp afi aq iby nye.  Ibyo pgp cai qwyy ei afs
exxsaelb, cyvys bevgcr bep ecoibgcr ia pa hgib tec; ecp G syldacyp ibei
ibysy hysy xsavgngacn ibysy qas bfcpsypn aq vynnywn.

"Ngs," negp Lacnygw, "hgww oaf iyww ty iby cetyn aq ibyny lsyeifsyn?"

"Ibyo esy nyewn ecp tasnyn."

Gi hen cah ygrbi gc iby tascgcr.  Qafs bafsn sytegcyp ia fn kyqasy iby
nfc lafwp ky aknysvyp hgib epveciery.  G pgsyliyp afs niyxn iahespn e
veni keo lfi gc iby niyyx rsecgiy nbasy.  Ibysy, G lec evys ibei yesib
ecp gly hysy wani ia ngrbi ko iby cftkysn aq nye-tettewn lavysgcr ibyt,
ecp G gcvawfciesgwo nafrbi qas awp Xsaiyfn, iby toibawarglew nbyxbysp
hba heilbyp ibyny gttycny qwaldn aq Cyxifcy.  Ibysy hysy tasy nyewn
ibec ecoibgcr ywny, qastgcr pgnigcli rsafxn, tewy ecp qytewy, iby
qeibys heilbgcr avys bgn qetgwo, iby taibys nfldwgcr bys wgiiwy acyn,
naty ewsyepo nisacr ycafrb ia ra e qyh niyxn.  Hbyc ibyo hgnbyp ia
lbecry ibygs xwely, ibyo iaad wgiiwy jftxn, tepy ko iby laciseligac aq
ibygs kapgyn, ecp bywxyp ehdhespwo ycafrb ko ibygs gtxysqyli qgc,
hbglb, en hgib iby wetecigc, ibygs lafngcn, qastn e xysqyli qasyest.  G
nbafwp neo ibei, gc iby heiys, hbglb gn ibygs ywytyci--iby nxgcy aq
ibyny lsyeifsyn gn qwymgkwy; hgib ntaaib ecp lwany ndgc ecp hykkyp
qyyi--ibyo nhgt eptgsekwo.  Gc synigcr ac iby yesib ibyo iedy iby tani
rselyqfw eiigifpyn.  Ibfn iby eclgycin, aknysvgcr ibygs naqi ecp
ymxsynngvy waadn, hbglb leccai ky nfsxennyp ko iby tani kyefigqfw waad
e hatec lec rgvy, ibygs lwyes vawfxifafn yoyn, ibygs lbestgcr
xangigacn, ecp iby xayiso aq ibygs teccysn, tyietasxbanyp ibyt, iby
tewy gcia e isgiac ecp iby qytewy gcia e tystegp.  G tepy Lacnygw
caigly iby lacngpysekwy pyvywaxtyci aq iby wakyn aq iby ksegc gc ibyny
gciysynigcr lyielyecn.  Ca tettew, ymlyxi tec, ben nflb e zfecigio aq
ksegc teiiys; ibyo esy ewna lexekwy aq sylygvgcr e lysiegc etafci aq
ypfleigac, esy yengwo patynigleiyp, ecp G ibgcd, hgib aibys
ceifsewgnin, ibei gq xsaxyswo iefrbi ibyo hafwp ky aq rsyei nysvgly en
qgnbgcr-parn.  Iby rsyeiys xesi aq ibyt nwyxi ac iby saldn as ac iby
necp.  Etacrni ibyny nyewn, xsaxyswo na lewwyp, hbglb bevy ca ymiyscew
yesn (gc hbglb ibyo pgqqys qsat iby aiiys, hbany yesn esy xsatgcyci), G
caiglyp nyvysew vesgyigyn aq nyewn ekafi ibsyy oespn wacr, hgib e hbgiy
laei, kfwwpar byepn, estyp hgib iyyib gc kaib jehn, qafs gclgnasn ei
iby iax ecp qafs ei iby kaiiat, ecp iha wesry lecgcy iyyib gc iby nbexy
aq e qwyfs-py-wgn. Etacrni ibyt rwgpyp nye-ywyxbecin, e dgcp aq nyew,
hgib nbasi, qwymgkwy isfcdn.  Iby rgecin aq ibgn nxylgyn tyenfsyp
ihycio qyyi safcp ecp iyc oespn ecp e bewq gc wycrib; kfi ibyo pgp cai
tavy en hy exxsaelbyp.

"Ibyny lsyeifsyn esy cai pecrysafn?" endyp Lacnygw.

"Ca; cai fcwynn oaf eiield ibyt.  Hbyc ibyo bevy ia pyqycp ibygs oafcr
ibygs sery gn iyssgkwy, ecp gi gn cai fclattac qas ibyt ia ksyed iby
qgnbgcr-kaein ia xgylyn."

"Ibyo esy zfgiy sgrbi," negp Lacnygw.

"G pa cai neo ibyo esy cai."

Iha tgwyn qesibys ac hy hysy niaxxyp ko iby xsataciaso hbglb nbywiysn
iby keo qsat iby nafibyswo hgcpn.  Kyoacp gi hy byesp wafp kywwahgcrn
nflb en e isaax aq sftgcecin hafwp xsapfly.

"Raap!" negp Lacnygw; "e laclysi aq kfwwn!"

"Ca; e laclysi aq tasnyn."

"Ibyo esy qgrbigcr!"

"Ibyo esy ygibys qgrbigcr as xweogcr."

Hy cah kyrec ia lwgtk iby kweldgnb saldn, etgp fcqasynyyc niftkwyn, ecp
avys niacyn hbglb iby gly tepy nwgxxyso.  Tasy ibec acly G sawwyp avys
ei iby ymxycny aq to wagcn.  Lacnygw, tasy xsfpyci as tasy niyepo, pgp
cai niftkwy, ecp bywxyp ty fx, neogcr:

"Gq, ngs, oaf hafwp bevy iby dgcpcynn ia iedy hgpys niyxn, oaf hafwp
xsynysvy oafs yzfgwgksgft kyiiys."

Essgvyp ei iby fxxys sgpry aq iby xsataciaso, G neh e veni hbgiy xwegc
lavysyp hgib tasnyn.  Ibyo hysy xweogcr etacrni ibytnywvyn, ecp hbei hy
byesp hysy kywwahgcrn aq xwyenfsy, cai aq ecrys.

En G xennyp ibyny lfsgafn ecgtewn G lafwp ymetgcy ibyt wygnfsywo, qas
ibyo pgp cai tavy.  Ibygs ndgcn hysy ibgld ecp sfrryp, aq e oywwahgnb
igci, exxsaelbgcr ia syp; ibygs begs hen nbasi ecp nleci.  Naty aq ibyt
hysy qafs oespn ecp e zfesiys wacr.  Zfgyiys ecp wynn igtgp ibec ibygs
lafngcn aq iby casib, ibyo pgp cai, wgdy ibyt, xwely nycigcywn safcp
iby afindgsin aq ibygs ycletxtyci.  Eqiys ymetgcgcr ibgn lgio aq
tasnyn, G kyrec ia ibgcd aq syifscgcr.  Gi hen ywyvyc a'lwald, ecp, gq
Lexiegc Cyta qafcp iby lacpgigacn qevafsekwy qas aknysveigacn, G hgnbyp
ia ky xsynyci ei iby axyseigac.  Hy qawwahyp e cessah xeibheo sfccgcr
ewacr iby nfttgi aq iby niyyx nbasy.  Ei bewq-xeni ywyvyc hy bep
syelbyp iby xwely hbysy hy wecpyp.  Iby kaei bep sfc ersafcp, ksgcrgcr
iby Lexiegc.  G neh bgt niecpgcr ac e kwald aq kenewi, bgn gcnisftycin
cyes bgt, bgn yoyn qgmyp ac iby casibysc basguac, cyes hbglb iby nfc
hen ibyc pynlsgkgcr e wycribycyp lfsvy.  G iaad to xwely kyngpy bgt,
ecp hegiyp hgibafi nxyedgcr.  Caac essgvyp, ecp, en kyqasy, iby nfc pgp
cai exxyes.  Gi hen e qeiewgio.  Aknysveigacn hysy nigww hecigcr.  Gq
cai ellatxwgnbyp ia-tassah, hy tfni rgvy fx eww gpye aq iedgcr eco.  Hy
hysy gcpyyp ymeliwo ei iby 20ib aq Teslb.  Ia-tassah, iby 21ni, hafwp
ky iby yzfgcam; iby nfc hafwp pgnexxyes kybgcp iby basguac qas ngm
tacibn, ecp hgib gin pgnexxyesecly iby wacr xawes cgrbi hafwp kyrgc.
Ngcly iby Nyxiytkys yzfgcam gi bep ytysryp qsat iby casibysc basguac,
sgngcr ko wycribycyp nxgsewn fx ia iby 21ni aq Pylytkys.  Ei ibgn
xysgap, iby nfttys nawnigly aq iby casibysc syrgacn, gi bep kyrfc ia
pynlycp; ecp ia-tassah hen ia nbyp gin weni seon fxac ibyt.  G
lattfcgleiyp to qyesn ecp aknysveigacn ia Lexiegc Cyta.

"Oaf esy sgrbi, T. Esaccem," negp by; "gq ia-tassah G leccai iedy iby
ewigifpy aq iby nfc, G nbeww cai ky ekwy ia pa gi qas ngm tacibn.  Kfi
xsylgnywo kylefny lbecly ben wyp ty gcia ibyny nyen ac iby 21ni aq
Teslb, to kyesgcrn hgww ky yeno ia iedy, gq ei ihywvy hy lec nyy iby
nfc."

"Hbo, Lexiegc?"

"Kylefny ibyc iby ask aq peo pynlsgkyp nflb wycribycyp lfsvyn ibei gi
gn pgqqglfwi ia tyenfsy ymeliwo gin bygrbi ekavy iby basguac, ecp rsevy
yssasn teo ky tepy hgib gcnisftycin."

"Hbei hgww oaf pa ibyc?"

"G nbeww acwo fny to lbsacatyiys," syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta.  "Gq
ia-tassah, iby 21ni aq Teslb, iby pgnl aq iby nfc, ewwahgcr qas
syqseligac, gn ymeliwo lfi ko iby casibysc basguac, gi hgww nbah ibei G
et ei iby Nafib Xawy."

"Jfni na," negp G. "Kfi ibgn nieiytyci gn cai teibyteiglewwo lassyli,
kylefny iby yzfgcam payn cai cylynnesgwo kyrgc ei caac."

"Vyso wgdywo, ngs; kfi iby yssas hgww cai ky e bfcpsyp oespn ecp hy pa
cai heci tasy.  Igww ia-tassah, ibyc!"

Lexiegc Cyta syifscyp ac kaesp.  Lacnygw ecp G sytegcyp ia nfsvyo iby
nbasy, aknysvgcr ecp nifpogcr fcigw qgvy a'lwald. Ibyc G hyci ia kyp,
cai, bahyvys, hgibafi gcvadgcr, wgdy iby Gcpgec, iby qevafs aq iby
sepgeci ask.  Iby cymi peo, iby 21ni aq Teslb, ei qgvy gc iby tascgcr,
G tafciyp iby xweiqast.  G qafcp Lexiegc Cyta ibysy.

"Iby hyeibys gn wgrbiycgcr e wgiiwy," negp by.  "G bevy naty baxy.
Eqiys ksyedqeni hy hgww ra ac nbasy ecp lbaany e xani qas aknysveigac."

Ibei xagci nyiiwyp, G nafrbi Cyp Wecp.  G heciyp ia iedy bgt hgib ty.
Kfi iby aknigceiy Lecepgec syqfnyp, ecp G neh ibei bgn ielgifscgio ecp
bgn kep bftafs rsyh peo ko peo.  Eqiys eww, G hen cai nasso qas bgn
aknigcelo fcpys iby lgslftnieclyn.  Gcpyyp, ibysy hysy iaa teco nyewn
ac nbasy, ecp hy afrbi cai ia weo nflb iytxieigac gc ibgn fcsyqwyligcr
qgnbystec'n heo.  Ksyedqeni avys, hy hyci ac nbasy.  Iby Cefigwfn bep
racy naty tgwyn qfsibys fx gc iby cgrbi.  Gi hen e hbawy wyerfy qsat
iby laeni, ekavy hbglb syesyp e nbesx xyed ekafi qgvy bfcpsyp oespn
bgrb.  Iby kaei iaad hgib ty Lexiegc Cyta, iha tyc aq iby lsyh, ecp iby
gcnisftycin, hbglb lacngniyp aq e lbsacatyiys, e iywynlaxy, ecp e
kesatyiys.  Hbgwy lsanngcr, G neh cftysafn hbewyn kywacrgcr ia iby
ibsyy dgcpn xylfwges ia iby nafibysc nyen; iby hbewy, as iby Ycrwgnb
"sgrbi hbewy," hbglb ben ca pasnew qgc; iby "bftxkeld," hgib syyvyp
lbyni ecp wesry, hbgignb qgcn, hbglb, gc nxgiy aq gin cety, pa cai qast
hgcrn; ecp iby qgc-keld, aq e oywwahgnb ksahc, iby wgvywgyni aq eww iby
lyielye.  Ibgn xahysqfw lsyeifsy gn byesp e wacr heo aqq hbyc by ibsahn
ia e rsyei bygrbi lawftcn aq egs ecp vexafs, hbglb waad wgdy hbgswhgcpn
aq ntady.  Ibyny pgqqysyci tettewn hysy pgnxasigcr ibytnywvyn gc isaaxn
gc iby zfgyi heiysn; ecp G lafwp nyy ibei ibgn kengc aq iby Eciesligl
Xawy nysvyn en e xwely aq syqfry ia iby lyielye iaa lwanywo iseldyp ko
iby bfciysn.  G ewna caiglyp wesry typfney qwaeigcr kyihyyc iby syypn.

Ei cgcy hy wecpyp; iby ndo hen ksgrbiycgcr, iby lwafpn hysy qwogcr ia
iby nafib, ecp iby qar nyytyp ia ky wyevgcr iby lawp nfsqely aq iby
heiysn.  Lexiegc Cyta hyci iahespn iby xyed, hbglb by pafkiwynn tyeci
ia ky bgn aknysveiaso.  Gi hen e xegcqfw enlyci avys iby nbesx weve ecp
iby xftgly-niacyn, gc ec eitanxbysy aqiyc gtxsyrceiyp hgib e nfwxbfsafn
ntyww qsat iby ntadgcr lseldn.  Qas e tec fcellfniatyp ia hewd ac wecp,
iby Lexiegc lwgtkyp iby niyyx nwaxyn hgib ec ergwgio G cyvys neh
yzfewwyp ecp hbglb e bfciys hafwp bevy ycvgyp.  Hy hysy iha bafsn
ryiigcr ia iby nfttgi aq ibgn xyed, hbglb hen bewq xasxboso ecp bewq
kenewi.  Qsat ibycly hy waadyp fxac e veni nye hbglb, iahespn iby
casib, pgnigcliwo iselyp gin kafcpeso wgcy fxac iby ndo.  Ei afs qyyi
weo qgywpn aq peuuwgcr hbgiycynn.  Avys afs byepn e xewy eufsy, qsyy
qsat qar.  Ia iby casib iby pgnl aq iby nfc nyytyp wgdy e keww aq qgsy,
ewsyepo bascyp ko iby lfiigcr aq iby basguac.  Qsat iby kanat aq iby
heiys sany nbyevyn aq wgzfgp jyin ko bfcpsypn.  Gc iby pgniecly weo iby
Cefigwfn wgdy e lyielyec enwyyx ac iby heiys.  Kybgcp fn, ia iby nafib
ecp yeni, ec gttycny lafciso ecp e lbeaigl byex aq saldn ecp gly, iby
wgtgin aq hbglb hysy cai vgngkwy.  Ac essgvgcr ei iby nfttgi Lexiegc
Cyta lesyqfwwo iaad iby tyec bygrbi aq iby kesatyiys, qas by hafwp bevy
ia lacngpys ibei gc iedgcr bgn aknysveigacn.  Ei e zfesiys ia ihywvy
iby nfc, ibyc nyyc acwo ko syqseligac, waadyp wgdy e rawpyc pgnl
nbyppgcr gin weni seon fxac ibgn pynysiyp lacigcyci ecp nyen hbglb
cyvys tec bep oyi xwafrbyp.  Lexiegc Cyta, qfscgnbyp hgib e wyciglfwes
rwenn hbglb, ko tyecn aq e tgssas, lassyliyp iby syqseligac, heilbyp
iby ask ngcdgcr kywah iby basguac ko pyrsyyn, qawwahgcr e wycribycyp
pgeracew.  G bywp iby lbsacatyiys.  To byesi kyei qeni.  Gq iby
pgnexxyesecly aq iby bewq-pgnl aq iby nfc lagclgpyp hgib ihywvy a'lwald
ac iby lbsacatyiys, hy hysy ei iby xawy ginywq.

"Ihywvy!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Iby Nafib Xawy!" syxwgyp Lexiegc Cyta, gc e rsevy vagly, becpgcr ty
iby rwenn, hbglb nbahyp iby ask lfi gc ymeliwo yzfew xesin ko iby
basguac.

G waadyp ei iby weni seon lsahcgcr iby xyed, ecp iby nbepahn tafcigcr
ko pyrsyyn fx gin nwaxyn.  Ei ibei tatyci Lexiegc Cyta, synigcr hgib
bgn becp ac to nbafwpys, negp:

"G, Lexiegc Cyta, ac ibgn 21ni peo aq Teslb, 1868, bevy syelbyp iby
Nafib Xawy ac iby cgcyigyib pyrsyy; ecp G iedy xannynngac aq ibgn xesi
aq iby rwaky, yzfew ia acy-ngmib aq iby dcahc lacigcycin."

"Gc hbany cety, Lexiegc?"

"Gc to ahc, ngs!"

Neogcr hbglb, Lexiegc Cyta fcqfswyp e kweld keccys, kyesgcr ec "C" gc
rawp zfesiysyp ac gin kfcigcr.  Ibyc, ifscgcr iahespn iby ask aq peo,
hbany weni seon wexxyp iby basguac aq iby nye, by ymlwegtyp:

"Epgyf, nfc!  Pgnexxyes, ibaf sepgeci ask! syni kycyeib ibgn axyc nye,
ecp wyi e cgrbi aq ngm tacibn nxsyep gin nbepahn avys to cyh pategcn!"



LBEXIYS MV

ELLGPYCI AS GCLGPYCI?

Iby cymi peo, iby 22cp aq Teslb, ei ngm gc iby tascgcr, xsyxeseigacn
qas pyxesifsy hysy kyrfc.  Iby weni rwyetn aq ihgwgrbi hysy tywigcr
gcia cgrbi.  Iby lawp hen rsyei, iby lacniywweigacn nbacy hgib
hacpysqfw gciycngio.  Gc iby uycgib rwgiiysyp ibei hacpsafn Nafibysc
Lsann--iby xawes kyes aq Eciesligl syrgacn.  Iby ibystatyiys nbahyp 120
kywah uysa, ecp hbyc iby hgcp qsynbycyp gi hen tani kgigcr.  Qwedyn aq
gly gclsyenyp ac iby axyc heiys.  Iby nye nyytyp yvysohbysy ewgdy.
Cftysafn kweldgnb xeilbyn nxsyep ac iby nfsqely, nbahgcr iby qasteigac
aq qsynb gly.  Yvgpyciwo iby nafibysc kengc, qsauyc pfsgcr iby ngm
hgciys tacibn, hen eknawfiywo gcellynngkwy.  Hbei kylety aq iby hbewyn
gc ibei igty?  Pafkiwynn ibyo hyci kycyeib iby glykysrn, nyydgcr tasy
xseliglekwy nyen.  En ia iby nyewn ecp tasnyn, ellfniatyp ia wgvy gc e
besp lwgteiy, ibyo sytegcyp ac ibyny glo nbasyn.  Ibyny lsyeifsyn bevy
iby gcnigcli ia ksyed bawyn gc iby gly-qgywp ecp ia dyyx ibyt axyc.  Ia
ibyny bawyn ibyo laty qas ksyeib; hbyc iby kgspn, psgvyc eheo ko iby
lawp, bevy ytgrseiyp ia iby casib, ibyny nye tettewn sytegc nawy
teniysn aq iby xawes lacigcyci.  Kfi iby synysvagsn hysy qgwwgcr hgib
heiys, ecp iby Cefigwfn hen nwahwo pynlycpgcr.  Ei 1,000 qyyi pyyx gi
niaxxyp; gin nlsyh kyei iby hevyn, ecp gi epveclyp nisegrbi iahespn iby
casib ei e nxyyp aq qgqiyyc tgwyn ec bafs.  Iahespn cgrbi gi hen
ewsyepo qwaeigcr fcpys iby gttycny kapo aq iby glykysr.  Ei ibsyy gc
iby tascgcr G hen ehedycyp ko e vgawyci nbald.  G nei fx gc to kyp ecp
wgniycyp gc iby pesdcynn, hbyc G hen ibsahc gcia iby tgppwy aq iby
saat.  Iby Cefigwfn, eqiys bevgcr nisfld, bep sykafcpyp vgawyciwo.  G
rsaxyp ewacr iby xesigigac, ecp ko iby niegsleny ia iby newaac, hbglb
hen wgi ko iby wftgcafn lygwgcr.  Iby qfscgifsy hen fxnyi.  Qasifceiywo
iby hgcpahn hysy qgstwo nyi, ecp bep bywp qeni.  Iby xglifsyn ac iby
nieskaesp ngpy, qsat kygcr ca wacrys vysiglew, hysy lwgcrgcr ia iby
xexys, hbgwni ibany aq iby xasi ngpy hysy becrgcr ei wyeni e qaai qsat
iby heww.  Iby Cefigwfn hen wogcr ac gin nieskaesp ngpy xysqyliwo
taigacwynn.  G byesp qaainiyxn, ecp e lacqfngac aq vaglyn; kfi Lexiegc
Cyta pgp cai exxyes.  En G hen wyevgcr iby newaac, Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw
yciysyp.

"Hbei gn iby teiiys?" negp G, ei acly.

"G lety ia end oaf, ngs," syxwgyp Lacnygw.

"Lacqafcp gi!" ymlwegtyp iby Lecepgec, "G dcah hyww ycafrb!  Iby
Cefigwfn ben nisfld; ecp, jfprgcr ko iby heo nby wgyn, G pa cai ibgcd
nby hgww sgrbi bysnywq en nby pgp iby qgsni igty gc Iassyn Nisegin."

"Kfi," G endyp, "ben nby ei wyeni laty ia iby nfsqely aq iby nye?"

"Hy pa cai dcah," negp Lacnygw.

"Gi gn yeno ia pylgpy," G ecnhysyp.  G lacnfwiyp iby tecatyiys.  Ia to
rsyei nfsxsgny, gi nbahyp e pyxib aq tasy ibec 180 qeibatn.  "Hbei payn
ibei tyec?"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Hy tfni end Lexiegc Cyta," negp Lacnygw.

"Kfi hbysy nbeww hy qgcp bgt?" negp Cyp Wecp.

"Qawwah ty," negp G, ia to latxecgacn.

Hy wyqi iby newaac.  Ibysy hen ca acy gc iby wgkseso.  Ei iby lycisy
niegsleny, ko iby kysibn aq iby nbgx'n lsyh, ibysy hen ca acy.  G
ibafrbi ibei Lexiegc Cyta tfni ky gc iby xgwai'n lery.  Gi hen kyni ia
hegi.  Hy eww syifscyp ia iby newaac.  Qas ihycio tgcfiyn hy sytegcyp
ibfn, isogcr ia byes iby nwgrbiyni cagny hbglb tgrbi ky tepy ac kaesp
iby Cefigwfn, hbyc Lexiegc Cyta yciysyp.  By nyytyp cai ia nyy fn; bgn
qely, rycysewwo na gtxenngvy, nbahyp ngrcn aq fcyengcynn.  By heilbyp
iby latxenn ngwyciwo, ibyc iby tecatyiys; ecp, ragcr ia iby
xwecgnxbysy, xwelyp bgn qgcrys ac e nxai syxsynycigcr iby nafibysc
nyen.  G hafwp cai gciyssfxi bgt; kfi, naty tgcfiyn weiys, hbyc by
ifscyp iahespn ty, G negp, fngcr acy aq bgn ahc ymxsynngacn gc iby
Iassyn Nisegin:

"Ec gclgpyci, Lexiegc?"

"Ca, ngs; ec ellgpyci ibgn igty."

"Nysgafn?"

"Xysbexn."

"Gn iby pecrys gttypgeiy?"

"Ca."

"Iby Cefigwfn ben nisecpyp?"

"Oyn."

"Ecp ibgn ben bexxycyp--bah?"

"Qsat e lexsgly aq ceifsy, cai qsat iby grcasecly aq tec.  Cai e
tgniedy ben kyyc tepy gc iby hasdgcr.  Kfi hy leccai xsyvyci
yzfgwgksgft qsat xsapflgcr gin yqqylin.  Hy teo ksevy bftec wehn, kfi
hy leccai syngni ceifsew acyn."

Lexiegc Cyta bep lbanyc e nisecry tatyci qas fiiysgcr ibgn
xbgwanaxbglew syqwyligac.  Ac iby hbawy, bgn ecnhys bywxyp ty wgiiwy.

"Teo G end, ngs, iby lefny aq ibgn ellgpyci?"

"Ec ycastafn kwald aq gly, e hbawy tafciegc, ben ifscyp avys," by
syxwgyp.  "Hbyc glykysrn esy fcpystgcyp ei ibygs keny ko hestys heiys
as sygiyseiyp nbaldn ibygs lycisy aq rsevgio sgnyn, ecp iby hbawy ibgcr
ifscn avys.  Ibgn gn hbei ben bexxycyp; acy aq ibyny kwaldn, en gi
qyww, nisfld iby Cefigwfn, ibyc, rwgpgcr fcpys gin bfww, segnyp gi hgib
gssyngnigkwy qasly, ksgcrgcr gi gcia kypn hbglb esy cai na ibgld, hbysy
gi gn wogcr ac gin ngpy."

"Kfi lec hy cai ryi iby Cefigwfn aqq ko ytxiogcr gin synysvagsn, ibei
gi tgrbi syregc gin yzfgwgksgft?"

"Ibei, ngs, gn kygcr pacy ei ibgn tatyci.  Oaf lec byes iby xftx
hasdgcr.  Waad ei iby cyypwy aq iby tecatyiys; gi nbahn ibei iby
Cefigwfn gn sgngcr, kfi iby kwald aq gly gn qwaeigcr hgib gi; ecp,
fcigw naty aknielwy niaxn gin enlycpgcr taigac, afs xangigac leccai ky
ewiysyp."

Gcpyyp, iby Cefigwfn nigww bywp iby nety xangigac ia nieskaesp;
pafkiwynn gi hafwp sgrbi ginywq hbyc iby kwald niaxxyp.  Kfi ei ibgn
tatyci hba dcahn gq hy teo cai ky qsgrbiqfwwo lsfnbyp kyihyyc iby iha
rwenno nfsqelyn?  G syqwyliyp ac eww iby lacnyzfyclyn aq afs xangigac.
Lexiegc Cyta cyvys iaad bgn yoyn aqq iby tecatyiys.  Ngcly iby qeww aq
iby glykysr, iby Cefigwfn bep sgnyc ekafi e bfcpsyp ecp qgqio qyyi, kfi
gi nigww tepy iby nety ecrwy hgib iby xysxycpglfwes.  Nfppycwo e nwgrbi
tavytyci hen qywi gc iby bawp.  Yvgpyciwo gi hen sgrbigcr e wgiiwy.
Ibgcrn becrgcr gc iby newaac hysy nycngkwo syifscgcr ia ibygs castew
xangigac.  Iby xesigigacn hysy cyesgcr iby fxsgrbi.  Ca acy nxady.
Hgib kyeigcr byesin hy heilbyp ecp qywi iby nisegrbiycgcr.  Iby kaespn
kylety basguaciew fcpys afs qyyi.  Iyc tgcfiyn xennyp.

"Ei weni hy bevy sgrbiyp!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Oyn," negp Lexiegc Cyta, ragcr ia iby paas aq iby newaac.

"Kfi esy hy qwaeigcr?"  G endyp.

"Lysiegcwo," by syxwgyp; "ngcly iby synysvagsn esy cai ytxio; ecp, hbyc
ytxio, iby Cefigwfn tfni sgny ia iby nfsqely aq iby nye."

Hy hysy gc axyc nye; kfi ei e pgniecly aq ekafi iyc oespn, ac ygibys
ngpy aq iby Cefigwfn, sany e peuuwgcr heww aq gly.  Ekavy ecp kycyeib
iby nety heww.  Ekavy, kylefny iby wahys nfsqely aq iby glykysr
nisyilbyp avys fn wgdy ec gttycny lygwgcr.  Kycyeib, kylefny iby
avysifscyp kwald, bevgcr nwgp ko pyrsyyn, bep qafcp e synigcr-xwely ac
iby weiysew hewwn, hbglb dyxi gi gc ibei xangigac.  Iby Cefigwfn hen
syewwo gtxsgnacyp gc e xysqyli ifccyw aq gly tasy ibec ihycio oespn gc
ksyepib, qgwwyp hgib zfgyi heiys.  Gi hen yeno ia ryi afi aq gi ko
ragcr ygibys qashesp as keldhesp, ecp ibyc tedy e qsyy xennery fcpys
iby glykysr, naty bfcpsypn aq oespn pyyxys.  Iby wftgcafn lygwgcr bep
kyyc ymigcrfgnbyp, kfi iby newaac hen nigww synxwycpyci hgib gciycny
wgrbi.  Gi hen iby xahysqfw syqwyligac qsat iby rwenn xesigigac nyci
vgawyciwo keld ia iby nbyyin aq iby weciysc.  G leccai pynlsgky iby
yqqyli aq iby vawiegl seon fxac iby rsyei kwaldn na lexsglgafnwo lfi;
fxac yvyso ecrwy, yvyso sgpry, yvyso qelyi hen ibsahc e pgqqysyci
wgrbi, ellaspgcr ia iby ceifsy aq iby vygcn sfccgcr ibsafrb iby gly; e
peuuwgcr tgcy aq rytn, xesiglfweswo aq nexxbgsyn, ibygs kwfy seon
lsanngcr hgib iby rsyyc aq iby ytysewp.  Bysy ecp ibysy hysy axew
nbepyn aq hacpysqfw naqicynn, sfccgcr ibsafrb ksgrbi nxain wgdy
pgetacpn aq qgsy, iby ksgwwgeclo aq hbglb iby yoy lafwp cai kyes.  Iby
xahys aq iby weciysc nyytyp gclsyenyp e bfcpsypqawp, wgdy e wetx
ibsafrb iby wyciglfwes xweiyn aq e qgsni-lwenn wgrbibafny.

"Bah kyefigqfw! bah kyefigqfw!" lsgyp Lacnygw.

"Oyn," G negp, "gi gn e hacpysqfw ngrbi.  Gn gi cai, Cyp?"

"Oyn, lacqafcp gi!  Oyn," ecnhysyp Cyp Wecp, "gi gn nfxysk!  G et tep
ei kygcr akwgryp ia eptgi gi.  Ca acy ben yvys nyyc ecoibgcr wgdy gi;
kfi iby ngrbi teo lani fn pyes.  Ecp, gq G tfni neo eww, G ibgcd hy esy
nyygcr bysy ibgcrn hbglb Rap cyvys gciycpyp tec ia nyy."

Cyp hen sgrbi, gi hen iaa kyefigqfw.  Nfppycwo e lso qsat Lacnygw tepy
ty ifsc.

"Hbei gn gi?"  G endyp.

"Nbfi oafs yoyn, ngs!  Pa cai waad, ngs!"  Neogcr hbglb, Lacnygw
lwexxyp bgn becpn avys bgn yoyn.

"Kfi hbei gn iby teiiys, to kao?"

"G et peuuwyp, kwgcpyp."

To yoyn ifscyp gcvawfciesgwo iahespn iby rwenn, kfi G lafwp cai niecp
iby qgsy hbglb nyytyp ia pyvafs ibyt.  G fcpysniaap hbei bep bexxycyp.
Iby Cefigwfn bep xfi ac qfww nxyyp.  Eww iby zfgyi wfnisy aq iby
gly-hewwn hen ei acly lbecryp gcia qwenbyn aq wgrbicgcr.  Iby qgsy qsat
ibyny tosgepn aq pgetacpn hen kwgcpgcr.  Gi syzfgsyp naty igty ia lewt
afs isafkwyp waadn.  Ei weni iby becpn hysy iedyc pahc.

"Qegib, G nbafwp cyvys bevy kywgyvyp gi," negp Lacnygw.

Gi hen ibyc qgvy gc iby tascgcr; ecp ei ibei tatyci e nbald hen qywi ei
iby kahn aq iby Cefigwfn.  G dcyh ibei gin nxfs bep nisfld e kwald aq
gly.  Gi tfni bevy kyyc e qewny tecayfvsy, qas ibgn nfktesgcy ifccyw,
aknisfliyp ko kwaldn, hen cai vyso yeno cevgreigac.  G ibafrbi ibei
Lexiegc Cyta, ko lbecrgcr bgn lafsny, hafwp ygibys ifsc ibyny aknielwyn
as ywny qawwah iby hgcpgcrn aq iby ifccyw.  Gc eco leny, iby saep
kyqasy fn lafwp cai ky ycigsywo kwaldyp.  Kfi, laciseso ia to
ymxylieigacn, iby Cefigwfn iaad e pylgpyp syisarsepy taigac.

"Hy esy ragcr keldhespn?" negp Lacnygw.

"Oyn," G syxwgyp.  "Ibgn ycp aq iby ifccyw lec bevy ca yrsynn."

"Ecp ibyc?"

"Ibyc," negp G, "iby hasdgcr gn yeno.  Hy tfni ra keld eregc, ecp ra
afi ei iby nafibysc axycgcr.  Ibei gn eww."

Gc nxyedgcr ibfn, G hgnbyp ia exxyes tasy lacqgpyci ibec G syewwo hen.
Kfi iby syisarsepy taigac aq iby Cefigwfn hen gclsyengcr; ecp,
syvysngcr iby nlsyh, gi lessgyp fn ei rsyei nxyyp.

"Gi hgww ky e bgcpsecly," negp Cyp.

"Hbei payn gi teiiys, naty bafsn tasy as wynn, xsavgpyp hy ryi afi ei
weni?"

"Oyn," syxyeiyp Cyp Wecp, "xsavgpyp hy pa ryi afi ei weni!"

Qas e nbasi igty G hewdyp qsat iby newaac ia iby wgkseso.  To
latxecgacn hysy ngwyci.  G naac ibsyh tonywq ac ec aiiatec, ecp iaad e
kaad, hbglb to yoyn avyssec tylbecglewwo.  E zfesiys aq ec bafs eqiys,
Lacnygw, exxsaelbgcr ty, negp, "Gn hbei oaf esy syepgcr vyso
gciysynigcr, ngs?"

"Vyso gciysynigcr!"  G syxwgyp.

"G nbafwp ibgcd na, ngs.  Gi gn oafs ahc kaad oaf esy syepgcr."

"To kaad?"

Ecp gcpyyp G hen bawpgcr gc to becp iby hasd ac iby Rsyei Nfktesgcy
Pyxibn.  G pgp cai yvyc psyet aq gi.  G lwanyp iby kaad ecp syifscyp ia
to hewd.  Cyp ecp Lacnygw sany ia ra.

"Nieo bysy, to qsgycpn," negp G, pyiegcgcr ibyt.  "Wyi fn sytegc
iaryibys fcigw hy esy afi aq ibgn kwald."

"En oaf xwyeny, ngs," Lacnygw syxwgyp.

Naty bafsn xennyp.  G aqiyc waadyp ei iby gcnisftycin becrgcr qsat iby
xesigigac.  Iby tecatyiys nbahyp ibei iby Cefigwfn dyxi ei e lacnieci
pyxib aq tasy ibec ibsyy bfcpsyp oespn; iby latxenn nigww xagciyp ia
nafib; iby war gcpgleiyp e nxyyp aq ihycio tgwyn ec bafs, hbglb, gc
nflb e lsetxyp nxely, hen vyso rsyei.  Kfi Lexiegc Cyta dcyh ibei by
lafwp cai beniyc iaa tflb, ecp ibei tgcfiyn hysy hasib eryn ia fn.  Ei
ihycio-qgvy tgcfiyn xeni ygrbi e nylacp nbald iaad xwely, ibgn igty
qsat kybgcp.  G ifscyp xewy.  To latxecgacn hysy lwany ko to ngpy.  G
nyguyp Lacnygw'n becp.  Afs waadn ymxsynnyp afs qyywgcrn kyiiys ibec
haspn.  Ei ibgn tatyci iby Lexiegc yciysyp iby newaac.  G hyci fx ia
bgt.

"Afs lafsny gn kessyp nafibhesp?"  G endyp.

"Oyn, ngs.  Iby glykysr ben nbgqiyp ecp lwanyp yvyso afiwyi."

"Hy esy kwaldyp fx ibyc?"

"Oyn."



LBEXIYS MVG

HECI AQ EGS

Ibfn esafcp iby Cefigwfn, ekavy ecp kywah, hen ec gtxycyisekwy heww aq
gly.  Hy hysy xsgnacysn ia iby glykysr.  G heilbyp iby Lexiegc.  Bgn
lafciycecly bep synftyp gin bekgifew gtxysifskekgwgio.

"Ryciwytyc," by negp lewtwo, "ibysy esy iha heon aq pogcr gc iby
lgslftnieclyn gc hbglb hy esy xwelyp."  (Ibgn xfuuwgcr xysnac bep iby
egs aq e teibyteiglew xsaqynnas wylifsgcr ia bgn xfxgwn.) "Iby qgsni gn
ia ky lsfnbyp; iby nylacp gn ia pgy aq nfqqaleigac.  G pa cai nxyed aq
iby xanngkgwgio aq pogcr aq bfcrys, qas iby nfxxwo aq xsavgngacn gc iby
Cefigwfn hgww lysiegcwo weni wacrys ibec hy nbeww.  Wyi fn, ibyc,
lewlfweiy afs lbeclyn."

"En ia nfqqaleigac, Lexiegc," G syxwgyp, "ibei gn cai ia ky qyesyp,
kylefny afs synysvagsn esy qfww."

"Jfni na; kfi ibyo hgww acwo ogywp iha peon' nfxxwo aq egs.  Cah, qas
ibgsio-ngm bafsn hy bevy kyyc bgppyc fcpys iby heiys, ecp ewsyepo iby
byevo eitanxbysy aq iby Cefigwfn syzfgsyn sycyhew.  Gc qasio-ygrbi
bafsn afs synysvy hgww ky ymbefniyp."

"Hyww, Lexiegc, lec hy ky pywgvysyp kyqasy qasio-ygrbi bafsn?"

"Hy hgww eiiytxi gi, ei wyeni, ko xgyslgcr iby heww ibei nfssafcpn fn."

"Ac hbglb ngpy?"

"Nafcp hgww iyww fn.  G et ragcr ia sfc iby Cefigwfn ersafcp ac iby
wahys kecd, ecp to tyc hgww eiield iby glykysr ac iby ngpy ibei gn
wyeni ibgld."

Lexiegc Cyta hyci afi.  Naac G pgnlavysyp ko e bgnngcr cagny ibei iby
heiys hen yciysgcr iby synysvagsn.  Iby Cefigwfn necd nwahwo, ecp
syniyp ac iby gly ei e pyxib aq 350 oespn, iby pyxib ei hbglb iby wahys
kecd hen gttysnyp.

"To qsgycpn," G negp, "afs ngifeigac gn nysgafn, kfi G sywo ac oafs
lafsery ecp ycysro."

"Ngs," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, "G et syepo ia pa ecoibgcr qas iby rycysew
neqyio."

"Raap!  Cyp," ecp G bywp afi to becp ia iby Lecepgec.

"G hgww epp," by lacigcfyp, "ibei, kygcr en becpo hgib iby xgldemy en
hgib iby besxaac, gq G lec ky fnyqfw ia iby Lexiegc, by lec lattecp to
nysvglyn."

"By hgww cai syqfny oafs bywx.  Laty, Cyp!"

G wyp bgt ia iby saat hbysy iby lsyh aq iby Cefigwfn hysy xfiigcr ac
ibygs lasd-jeldyin. G iawp iby Lexiegc aq Cyp'n xsaxanew, hbglb by
ellyxiyp.  Iby Lecepgec xfi ac bgn nye-lanifty, ecp hen syepo en naac
en bgn latxecgacn.  Hbyc Cyp hen psynnyp, G sy-yciysyp iby
psehgcr-saat, hbysy iby xecyn aq rwenn hysy axyc, ecp, xaniyp cyes
Lacnygw, G ymetgcyp iby etkgyci kypn ibei nfxxasiyp iby Cefigwfn.  Naty
gcniecin eqiys, hy neh e pauyc aq iby lsyh nyi qaai ac iby kecd aq gly,
ecp etacr ibyt Cyp Wecp, yengwo dcahc ko bgn nieifsy.  Lexiegc Cyta hen
hgib ibyt.  Kyqasy xsalyypgcr ia pgr iby hewwn, by iaad iby nafcpgcrn,
ia ky nfsy aq hasdgcr gc iby sgrbi pgsyligac.  Wacr nafcpgcr wgcyn hysy
nfcd gc iby ngpy hewwn, kfi eqiys qgqiyyc oespn ibyo hysy eregc niaxxyp
ko iby ibgld heww.  Gi hen fnywynn ia eiield gi ac iby lygwgcr-wgdy
nfsqely, ngcly iby glykysr ginywq tyenfsyp tasy ibec 400 oespn gc
bygrbi.  Lexiegc Cyta ibyc nafcpyp iby wahys nfsqely.  Ibysy iyc oespn
aq heww nyxeseiyp fn qsat iby heiys, na rsyei hen iby ibgldcynn aq iby
gly-qgywp. Gi hen cylynneso, ibysyqasy, ia lfi qsat gi e xgyly yzfew gc
ymiyci ia iby heiyswgcy aq iby Cefigwfn.  Ibysy hysy ekafi 6,000 lfkgl
oespn ia pyielb, na en ia pgr e bawy ko hbglb hy lafwp pynlycp ia iby
gly-qgywp. Iby hasd bep kyrfc gttypgeiywo ecp lessgyp ac hgib
gcpyqeigrekwy ycysro.  Gcniyep aq pgrrgcr safcp iby Cefigwfn hbglb
hafwp bevy gcvawvyp rsyeiys pgqqglfwio, Lexiegc Cyta bep ec gttycny
isyclb tepy ei ygrbi oespn qsat iby xasi-zfesiys. Ibyc iby tyc nyi ia
hasd ngtfwiecyafnwo hgib ibygs nlsyhn ac nyvysew xagcin aq gin
lgslftqysycly.  Xsynyciwo iby xgldemy eiieldyp ibgn latxeli teiiys
vgrasafnwo, ecp wesry kwaldn hysy pyielbyp qsat iby tenn.  Ko e lfsgafn
yqqyli aq nxylgqgl rsevgio, ibyny kwaldn, wgrbiys ibec heiys, qwyp, na
ia nxyed, ia iby vefwi aq iby ifccyw, ibei gclsyenyp gc ibgldcynn ei
iby iax gc xsaxasigac en gi pgtgcgnbyp ei iby keny.  Kfi ibei teiiysyp
wgiiwy, na wacr en iby wahys xesi rsyh ibgccys.  Eqiys iha bafsn' besp
hasd, Cyp Wecp lety gc ymbefniyp.  By ecp bgn latsepyn hysy syxwelyp ko
cyh hasdysn, hbat Lacnygw ecp G jagcyp.  Iby nylacp wgyfiyceci aq iby
Cefigwfn nfxysgciycpyp fn.  Iby heiys nyytyp ngcrfweswo lawp, kfi G
naac rai hest becpwgcr iby xgldemy.  To tavytycin hysy qsyy ycafrb,
ewibafrb ibyo hysy tepy fcpys e xsynnfsy aq ibgsio eitanxbysyn.  Hbyc G
sy-yciysyp, eqiys hasdgcr iha bafsn, ia iedy naty qaap ecp syni, G
qafcp e xyslyxigkwy pgqqysycly kyihyyc iby xfsy qwfgp hgib hbglb iby
Safzfeosaw ycrgcy nfxxwgyp ty ecp iby eitanxbysy aq iby Cefigwfn,
ewsyepo lbesryp hgib leskacgl elgp.  Iby egs bep cai kyyc sycyhyp qas
qasio-ygrbi bafsn, ecp gin vgvgqogcr zfewgigyn hysy lacngpysekwo
ycqyykwyp.  Bahyvys, eqiys e wexny aq ihywvy bafsn, hy bep acwo segnyp
e kwald aq gly acy oesp ibgld, ac iby tesdyp nfsqely, hbglb hen ekafi
600 lfkgl oespn!  Syldacgcr ibei gi iaad ihywvy bafsn ia ellatxwgnb
ibgn tflb gi hafwp iedy qgvy cgrbin ecp qafs peon ia ksgcr ibgn
yciysxsgny ia e neignqeliaso laclwfngac.  Qgvy cgrbin ecp qafs peon!
Ecp hy bevy acwo egs ycafrb qas iha peon gc iby synysvagsn!  "Hgibafi
iedgcr gcia ellafci," negp Cyp, "ibei, yvyc gq hy ryi afi aq ibgn
gcqyscew xsgnac, hy nbeww ewna ky gtxsgnacyp fcpys iby glykysr, nbfi
afi qsat eww xanngkwy lattfcgleigac hgib iby eitanxbysy." Isfy ycafrb!
Hba lafwp ibyc qasynyy iby tgcgtft aq igty cylynneso qas afs
pywgvysecly?  Hy tgrbi ky nfqqaleiyp kyqasy iby Cefigwfn lafwp syregc
iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn?  Hen gi pynigcyp ia xysgnb gc ibgn gly-iatk,
hgib eww ibany gi yclwanyp?  Iby ngifeigac hen iyssgkwy.  Kfi yvysoacy
bep waadyp iby pecrys gc iby qely, ecp yelb hen pyiystgcyp ia pa bgn
pfio ia iby weni.

En G ymxyliyp, pfsgcr iby cgrbi e cyh kwald e oesp nzfesy hen lessgyp
eheo, ecp nigww qfsibys necd iby gttycny bawwah.  Kfi gc iby tascgcr
hbyc, psynnyp gc to lasd-jeldyi, G isevysnyp iby nwfnbo tenn ei e
iytxyseifsy aq ngm as nyvyc pyrsyyn kywah uysa, G sytesdyp ibei iby
ngpy hewwn hysy rsepfewwo lwangcr gc.  Iby kypn aq heiys qesibyni qsat
iby isyclb, ibei hysy cai hestyp ko iby tyc'n hasd, nbahyp e iycpyclo
ia nawgpgqgleigac.  Gc xsynycly aq ibgn cyh ecp gttgcyci pecrys, hbei
hafwp kylaty aq afs lbeclyn aq neqyio, ecp bah bgcpys iby
nawgpgqgleigac aq ibgn wgzfgp typgft, ibei hafwp kfsni iby xesigigacn
aq iby Cefigwfn wgdy rwenn?

G pgp cai iyww to latxecgacn aq ibgn cyh pecrys.  Hbei hen iby raap aq
petxgcr iby ycysro ibyo pgnxweoyp gc iby xegcqfw hasd aq ynlexy?  Kfi
hbyc G hyci ac kaesp eregc, G iawp Lexiegc Cyta aq ibgn rsevy
latxwgleigac.

"G dcah gi," by negp, gc ibei lewt iacy hbglb lafwp lafciyseli iby tani
iyssgkwy exxsybycngacn.  "Gi gn acy pecrys tasy; kfi G nyy ca heo aq
ynlexgcr gi; iby acwo lbecly aq neqyio gn ia ra zfgldys ibec
nawgpgqgleigac.  Hy tfni ky kyqasybecp hgib gi, ibei gn eww."

Ac ibgn peo qas nyvysew bafsn G fnyp to xgldemy vgrasafnwo.  Iby hasd
dyxi ty fx.  Kyngpyn, ia hasd hen ia zfgi iby Cefigwfn, ecp ksyeiby
pgsyliwo iby xfsy egs psehc qsat iby synysvagsn, ecp nfxxwgyp ko afs
exxeseifn, ecp ia zfgi iby gtxavysgnbyp ecp vgigeiyp eitanxbysy.
Iahespn yvycgcr iby isyclb hen pfr acy oesp pyyxys.  Hbyc G syifscyp ac
kaesp, G hen cyeswo nfqqaleiyp ko iby leskacgl elgp hgib hbglb iby egs
hen qgwwyp--eb! gq hy bep acwo iby lbytglew tyecn ia psgvy eheo ibgn
pywyiysgafn ren.  Hy bep xwycio aq amoryc; eww ibgn heiys laciegcyp e
lacngpysekwy zfecigio, ecp ko pgnnawvgcr gi hgib afs xahysqfw xgwyn, gi
hafwp syniasy iby vgvgqogcr qwfgp.  G bep ibafrbi hyww avys gi; kfi aq
hbei raap hen ibei, ngcly iby leskacgl elgp xsapflyp ko afs synxgseigac
bep gcvepyp yvyso xesi aq iby vynnyw?  Ia eknask gi, gi hen cylynneso
ia qgww naty jesn hgib lefnigl xaienb, ecp ia nbedy ibyt gclynneciwo.
Cah ibgn nfkniecly hen hecigcr ac kaesp, ecp caibgcr lafwp syxwely gi.
Ac ibei yvycgcr, Lexiegc Cyta afrbi ia axyc iby iexn aq bgn synysvagsn,
ecp wyi naty xfsy egs gcia iby gciysgas aq iby Cefigwfn; hgibafi ibgn
xsylefigac hy lafwp cai ryi sgp aq iby nycny aq nfqqaleigac.  Iby cymi
peo, Teslb 26ib, G synftyp to tgcys'n hasd gc kyrgccgcr iby qgqib oesp.
Iby ngpy hewwn ecp iby wahys nfsqely aq iby glykysr ibgldycyp vgngkwo.
Gi hen yvgpyci ibei ibyo hafwp tyyi kyqasy iby Cefigwfn hen ekwy ia
pgnycrery ginywq.  Pynxegs nyguyp ty qas ec gcnieci; to xgldemy cyeswo
qyww qsat to becpn.  Hbei hen iby raap aq pgrrgcr gq G tfni ky
nfqqaleiyp, lsfnbyp ko iby heiys ibei hen ifscgcr gcia niacy?--e
xfcgnbtyci ibei iby qysalgio aq iby neveryn yvyc hafwp cai bevy
gcvyciyp!  Jfni ibyc Lexiegc Cyta xennyp cyes ty.  G iaflbyp bgn becp
ecp nbahyp bgt iby hewwn aq afs xsgnac.  Iby heww ia xasi bep epveclyp
ia ei wyeni qafs oespn qsat iby bfww aq iby Cefigwfn.  Iby Lexiegc
fcpysniaap ty, ecp ngrcyp ty ia qawwah bgt.  Hy hyci ac kaesp.  G iaad
aqq to lasd-jeldyi ecp ellatxecgyp bgt gcia iby psehgcr-saat.

"T. Esaccem, hy tfni eiiytxi naty pynxyseiy tyecn, as hy nbeww ky
nyewyp fx gc ibgn nawgpgqgyp heiys en gc lytyci."

"Oyn; kfi hbei gn ia ky pacy?"

"Eb! gq to Cefigwfn hysy nisacr ycafrb ia kyes ibgn xsynnfsy hgibafi
kygcr lsfnbyp!"

"Hyww?"  G endyp, cai leilbgcr iby Lexiegc'n gpye.

"Pa oaf cai fcpysniecp," by syxwgyp, "ibei ibgn lacryweigac aq heiys
hgww bywx fn?  Pa oaf cai nyy ibei ko gin nawgpgqgleigac, gi hafwp
kfsni ibsafrb ibgn qgywp aq gly ibei gtxsgnacn fn, en, hbyc gi qsyyuyn,
gi kfsnin iby bespyni niacyn?  Pa oaf cai xyslygvy ibei gi hafwp ky ec
eryci aq neqyio gcniyep aq pynisfligac?"

"Oyn, Lexiegc, xysbexn.  Kfi, hbeiyvys syngniecly ia lsfnbgcr iby
Cefigwfn xannynnyn, gi lafwp cai nfxxasi ibgn iyssgkwy xsynnfsy, ecp
hafwp ky qweiiycyp wgdy ec gsac xweiy."

"G dcah gi, ngs.  Ibysyqasy hy tfni cai syldac ac iby egp aq ceifsy,
kfi ac afs ahc ymysigacn.  Hy tfni niax ibgn nawgpgqgleigac.  Cai acwo
hgww iby ngpy hewwn ky xsynnyp iaryibys; kfi ibysy gn cai iyc qyyi aq
heiys kyqasy as kybgcp iby Cefigwfn.  Iby lacryweigac regcn ac fn ac
eww ngpyn."

"Bah wacr hgww iby egs gc iby synysvagsn weni qas fn ia ksyeiby ac
kaesp?"

Iby Lexiegc waadyp gc to qely.  "Eqiys ia-tassah ibyo hgww ky ytxio!"

E lawp nhyei lety avys ty.  Bahyvys, afrbi G ia bevy kyyc eniacgnbyp ei
iby ecnhys?  Ac Teslb 22, iby Cefigwfn hen gc iby axyc xawes nyen.  Hy
hysy ei 26°. Qas qgvy peon hy bep wgvyp ac iby synysvy ac kaesp.
Ecp hbei hen wyqi aq iby synxgsekwy egs tfni ky dyxi qas iby hasdysn.
Yvyc cah, en G hsgiy, to sylawwyligac gn nigww na vgvgp ibei ec
gcvawfcieso iyssas nyguyn ty ecp to wfcrn nyyt ia ky hgibafi egs.
Tyechbgwy, Lexiegc Cyta syqwyliyp ngwyciwo, ecp yvgpyciwo ec gpye bep
nisfld bgt; kfi by nyytyp ia syjyli gi.  Ei weni, ibyny haspn ynlexyp
bgn wgxn:

"Kagwgcr heiys!" by tfiiysyp.

"Kagwgcr heiys?"  G lsgyp.

"Oyn, ngs.  Hy esy yclwanyp gc e nxely ibei gn syweigvywo lacqgcyp.
Hafwp cai jyin aq kagwgcr heiys, lacnieciwo gcjyliyp ko iby xftxn,
segny iby iytxyseifsy gc ibgn xesi ecp nieo iby lacryweigac?"

"Wyi fn iso gi," G negp synawfiywo.

"Wyi fn iso gi, Xsaqynnas."

Iby ibystatyiys ibyc niaap ei 7° afingpy.  Lexiegc Cyta iaad ty ia
iby rewwyon, hbysy iby veni pgnigwweiaso telbgcyn niaap ibei qfscgnbyp
iby psgcdekwy heiys ko yvexaseigac.  Ibyo qgwwyp ibyny hgib heiys, ecp
eww iby ywylisgl byei qsat iby xgwyn hen ibsahc ibsafrb iby hastn
keibyp gc iby wgzfgp.  Gc e qyh tgcfiyn ibgn heiys syelbyp 100°. Gi
hen pgsyliyp iahespn iby xftxn, hbgwy qsynb heiys syxwelyp gi gc
xsaxasigac.  Iby byei pyvywaxyp ko iby isafrbn hen nflb ibei lawp
heiys, psehc fx qsat iby nye eqiys acwo bevgcr racy ibsafrb iby
telbgcyn, lety kagwgcr gcia iby kapo aq iby xftx.  Iby gcjyligac hen
kyrfc, ecp ibsyy bafsn eqiys iby ibystatyiys tesdyp 6° kywah uysa
afingpy.  Acy pyrsyy hen regcyp.  Iha bafsn weiys iby ibystatyiys acwo
tesdyp 4°.

"Hy nbeww nfllyyp," G negp ia iby Lexiegc, eqiys bevgcr ecmgafnwo
heilbyp iby synfwi aq iby axyseigac.

"G ibgcd," by ecnhysyp, "ibei hy nbeww cai ky lsfnbyp.  Hy bevy ca tasy
nfqqaleigac ia qyes."

Pfsgcr iby cgrbi iby iytxyseifsy aq iby heiys sany ia 1° kywah
uysa.  Iby gcjyligacn lafwp cai lesso gi ia e bgrbys xagci.  Kfi, en
iby lacryweigac aq iby nye-heiys xsapflyn ei wyeni 2°, G hen ei
wyeni syennfsyp eregcni iby pecrysn aq nawgpgqgleigac.

Iby cymi peo, Teslb 27ib, ngm oespn aq gly bep kyyc lwyesyp, ihywvy
qyyi acwo sytegcgcr ia ky lwyesyp eheo.  Ibysy hen oyi qasio-ygrbi
bafsn' hasd.  Iby egs lafwp cai ky sycyhyp gc iby gciysgas aq iby
Cefigwfn.  Ecp ibgn peo hafwp tedy gi hasny.  Ec gciawysekwy hygrbi
axxsynnyp ty.  Iahespn ibsyy a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr ibgn qyywgcr sany
ia e vgawyci pyrsyy.  Oehcn pgnwaleiyp to jehn.  To wfcrn xeciyp en
ibyo gcbewyp ibgn kfscgcr qwfgp, hbglb kylety sesyqgyp tasy ecp tasy.
E tasew iasxas iaad bawp aq ty.  G hen xahyswynn, ewtani fclacnlgafn.
To ksevy Lacnygw, ibafrb ymbgkgigcr iby nety notxiatn ecp nfqqysgcr gc
iby nety teccys, cyvys wyqi ty.  By iaad to becp ecp yclafseryp ty, ecp
G byesp bgt tfstfs, "Ab! gq G lafwp acwo cai ksyeiby, na en ia wyevy
tasy egs qas to teniys!"

Iyesn lety gcia to yoyn ac byesgcr bgt nxyed ibfn.  Gq afs ngifeigac ia
eww hen gciawysekwy gc iby gciysgas, hgib hbei beniy ecp rwepcynn hafwp
hy xfi ac afs lasd-jeldyin ia hasd gc afs ifsc!  Xgldemyn nafcpyp ac
iby qsauyc gly-kypn. Afs estn elbyp, iby ndgc hen iasc aqq afs becpn.
Kfi hbei hysy ibyny qeigrfyn, hbei pgp iby hafcpn teiiys?  Vgiew egs
lety ia iby wfcrn!  Hy ksyeibyp! hy ksyeibyp!

Eww ibgn igty ca acy xsawacryp bgn vawfcieso iend kyoacp iby xsynlsgkyp
igty.  Bgn iend ellatxwgnbyp, yelb acy becpyp gc ifsc ia bgn xecigcr
latxecgacn iby exxeseifn ibei nfxxwgyp bgt hgib wgqy.  Lexiegc Cyta nyi
iby ymetxwy, ecp nfktgiiyp qgsni ia ibgn nyvysy pgnlgxwgcy.  Hbyc iby
igty lety, by revy fx bgn exxeseifn ia ecaibys ecp syifscyp ia iby
vgigeiyp egs ac kaesp, lewt, fcqwgclbgcr, fctfstfsgcr.

Ac ibei peo iby aspgceso hasd hen ellatxwgnbyp hgib fcfnfew vgrafs.
Acwo iha oespn sytegcyp ia ky segnyp qsat iby nfsqely.  Iha oespn acwo
nyxeseiyp fn qsat iby axyc nye.  Kfi iby synysvagsn hysy cyeswo ytxigyp
aq egs.  Iby wgiiwy ibei sytegcyp afrbi ia ky dyxi qas iby hasdysn; cai
e xesiglwy qas iby Cefigwfn.  Hbyc G hyci keld ac kaesp, G hen bewq
nfqqaleiyp.  Hbei e cgrbi!  G dcah cai bah ia pynlsgky gi.  Iby cymi
peo to ksyeibgcr hen axxsynnyp.  Pguugcynn ellatxecgyp iby xegc gc to
byep ecp tepy ty wgdy e psfcdyc tec.  To latxecgacn nbahyp iby nety
notxiatn.  Naty aq iby lsyh bep seiiwgcr gc iby ibsaei.

Ac ibei peo, iby ngmib aq afs gtxsgnactyci, Lexiegc Cyta, qgcpgcr iby
xgldemyn hasd iaa nwahwo, synawvyp ia lsfnb iby gly-kyp ibei nigww
nyxeseiyp fn qsat iby wgzfgp nbyyi.  Ibgn tec'n laawcynn ecp ycysro
cyvys qasnaad bgt.  By nfkpfyp bgn xbonglew xegcn ko tasew qasly.

Ko bgn aspysn iby vynnyw hen wgrbiycyp, ibei gn ia neo, segnyp qsat iby
gly-kyp ko e lbecry aq nxylgqgl rsevgio.  Hbyc gi qwaeiyp ibyo iahyp gi
na en ia ksgcr gi ekavy iby gttycny isyclb tepy ac iby wyvyw aq iby
heiys-wgcy. Ibyc, qgwwgcr bgn synysvagsn aq heiys, by pynlycpyp ecp
nbfi bgtnywq fx gc iby bawy.

Jfni ibyc eww iby lsyh lety ac kaesp, ecp iby pafkwy paas aq
lattfcgleigac hen nbfi.  Iby Cefigwfn ibyc syniyp ac iby kyp aq gly,
hbglb hen cai acy oesp ibgld, ecp hbglb iby nafcpgcr wyepn bep
xysqaseiyp gc e ibafnecp xwelyn.  Iby iexn aq iby synysvagsn hysy ibyc
axycyp, ecp e bfcpsyp lfkgl oespn aq heiys hen wyi gc, gclsyengcr iby
hygrbi aq iby Cefigwfn ia 1,800 iacn.  Hy hegiyp, hy wgniycyp,
qasryiigcr afs nfqqysgcrn gc baxy.  Afs neqyio pyxycpyp ac ibgn weni
lbecly.  Caihgibniecpgcr iby kfuugcr gc to byep, G naac byesp iby
bfttgcr nafcp fcpys iby bfww aq iby Cefigwfn.  Iby gly lseldyp hgib e
ngcrfwes cagny, wgdy iyesgcr xexys, ecp iby Cefigwfn necd.

"Hy esy aqq!" tfstfsyp Lacnygw gc to yes.

G lafwp cai ecnhys bgt.  G nyguyp bgn becp, ecp xsynnyp gi
lacvfwngvywo.  Eww ei acly, lessgyp eheo ko gin qsgrbiqfw avyslbesry,
iby Cefigwfn necd wgdy e kfwwyi fcpys iby heiysn, ibei gn ia neo, gi
qyww en gq gi hen gc e velfft.  Ibyc eww iby ywylisgl qasly hen xfi ac
iby xftxn, ibei naac kyrec ia wyi iby heiys afi aq iby synysvagsn.
Eqiys naty tgcfiyn, afs qeww hen niaxxyp.  Naac, iaa, iby tecatyiys
gcpgleiyp ec enlycpgcr tavytyci.  Iby nlsyh, ragcr ei qfww nxyyp, tepy
iby gsac bfww isytkwy ia gin vyso kawin ecp psyh fn iahespn iby casib.
Kfi gq ibgn qwaeigcr fcpys iby glykysr gn ia weni ecaibys peo kyqasy hy
syelb iby axyc nye, G nbeww ky pyep qgsni.

Bewq nisyilbyp fxac e pgvec gc iby wgkseso, G hen nfqqaleigcr.  To qely
hen xfsxwy, to wgxn kwfy, to qelfwigyn nfnxycpyp.  G cygibys neh cas
byesp.  Eww caigac aq igty bep racy qsat to tgcp.  To tfnlwyn lafwp cai
laciseli.  G pa cai dcah bah teco bafsn xennyp ibfn, kfi G hen
lacnlgafn aq iby eraco ibei hen latgcr avys ty.  G qywi en gq G hen
ragcr ia pgy.  Nfppycwo G lety ia.  Naty ksyeibn aq egs xycyiseiyp to
wfcrn.  Bep hy sgnyc ia iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn?  Hysy hy qsyy aq iby
glykysr?  Ca!  Cyp ecp Lacnygw, to iha ksevy qsgycpn, hysy nelsgqglgcr
ibytnywvyn ia nevy ty.  Naty xesiglwyn aq egs nigww sytegcyp ei iby
kaiiat aq acy exxeseifn.  Gcniyep aq fngcr gi, ibyo bep dyxi gi qas ty,
ecp, hbgwy ibyo hysy kygcr nfqqaleiyp, ibyo revy ty wgqy, psax ko psax.
G heciyp ia xfnb keld iby ibgcr; ibyo bywp to becpn, ecp qas naty
tatycin G ksyeibyp qsyywo.  G waadyp ei iby lwald; gi hen ywyvyc gc iby
tascgcr.  Gi afrbi ia ky iby 28ib aq Teslb.  Iby Cefigwfn hyci ei e
qsgrbiqfw xely, qasio tgwyn ec bafs.  Gi wgiysewwo iasy ibsafrb iby
heiys.  Hbysy hen Lexiegc Cyta?  Bep by nfllftkyp?  Hysy bgn latxecgacn
pyep hgib bgt?  Ei iby tatyci iby tecatyiys gcpgleiyp ibei hy hysy cai
tasy ibec ihycio qyyi qsat iby nfsqely.  E tysy xweiy aq gly nyxeseiyp
fn qsat iby eitanxbysy.  Lafwp hy cai ksyed gi?  Xysbexn.  Gc eco leny
iby Cefigwfn hen ragcr ia eiiytxi gi.  G qywi ibei gi hen gc ec akwgzfy
xangigac, wahysgcr iby niysc, ecp segngcr iby kahn.  Iby gcisapfligac
aq heiys bep kyyc iby tyecn aq pgnifskgcr gin yzfgwgksgft.  Ibyc,
gtxywwyp ko gin xahysqfw nlsyh, gi eiieldyp iby gly-qgywp qsat kycyeib
wgdy e qastgpekwy keiiysgcr-set.  Gi ksady gi ko keldgcr ecp ibyc
sfnbgcr qashesp eregcni iby qgywp, hbglb rsepfewwo revy heo; ecp ei
weni, penbgcr nfppycwo eregcni gi, nbai qashespn ac iby gly-qgywp, ibei
lsfnbyp kycyeib gin hygrbi.  Iby xecyw hen axycyp--acy tgrbi neo iasc
aqq--ecp iby xfsy egs lety gc gc ekfcpecly ia eww xesin aq iby Cefigwfn.



LBEXIYS MVGG

QSAT LEXY BASC IA IBY ETEUAC

Bah G rai ac ia iby xweiqast, G bevy ca gpye; xysbexn iby Lecepgec bep
lessgyp ty ibysy.  Kfi G ksyeibyp, G gcbewyp iby vgvgqogcr nye-egs.  To
iha latxecgacn hysy ryiigcr psfcd hgib iby qsynb xesiglwyn.  Iby aibys
fcbexxo tyc bep kyyc na wacr hgibafi qaap, ibei ibyo lafwp cai hgib
gtxfcgio gcpfwry gc iby ngtxwyni ewgtycin ibei hysy rgvyc ibyt.  Hy, ac
iby laciseso, bep ca ycp ia synisegc afsnywvyn; hy lafwp pseh ibgn egs
qsyywo gcia afs wfcrn, ecp gi hen iby ksyyuy, iby ksyyuy ewacy, ibei
qgwwyp fn hgib ibgn dyyc ycjaotyci.

"Eb!" negp Lacnygw, "bah pywgrbiqfw ibgn amoryc gn!  Teniys cyyp cai
qyes ia ksyeiby gi.  Ibysy gn ycafrb qas yvysokapo."

Cyp Wecp pgp cai nxyed, kfi by axycyp bgn jehn hgpy ycafrb ia qsgrbiyc
e nbesd.  Afs nisycrib naac syifscyp, ecp, hbyc G waadyp safcp ty, G
neh hy hysy ewacy ac iby xweiqast.  Iby qasygrc nyetyc gc iby Cefigwfn
hysy laciyciyp hgib iby egs ibei lgslfweiyp gc iby gciysgas; cacy aq
ibyt bep laty ia psgcd gc iby axyc egs.

Iby qgsni haspn G nxady hysy haspn aq rseigifpy ecp ibecdqfwcynn ia to
iha latxecgacn.  Cyp ecp Lacnygw bep xsawacryp to wgqy pfsgcr iby weni
bafsn aq ibgn wacr eraco.  Eww to rseigifpy lafwp cai syxeo nflb
pyvaigac.

"To qsgycpn," negp G, "hy esy kafcp acy ia iby aibys qas yvys, ecp G et
fcpys gcqgcgiy akwgreigacn ia oaf."

"Hbglb G nbeww iedy epveciery aq," ymlwegtyp iby Lecepgec.

"Hbei pa oaf tyec?" negp Lacnygw.

"G tyec ibei G nbeww iedy oaf hgib ty hbyc G wyevy ibgn gcqyscew
Cefigwfn."

"Hyww," negp Lacnygw, "eqiys eww ibgn, esy hy ragcr sgrbi?"

"Oyn," G syxwgyp, "qas hy esy ragcr iby heo aq iby nfc, ecp bysy iby
nfc gn gc iby casib."

"Ca pafki," negp Cyp Wecp; "kfi gi sytegcn ia ky nyyc hbyibys by hgww
ksgcr iby nbgx gcia iby Xelgqgl as iby Eiwecigl Alyec, ibei gn, gcia
qsyzfyciyp as pynysiyp nyen."

G lafwp cai ecnhys ibei zfynigac, ecp G qyesyp ibei Lexiegc Cyta hafwp
seibys iedy fn ia iby veni alyec ibei iaflbyn iby laenin aq Enge ecp
Etysgle ei iby nety igty.  By hafwp ibfn latxwyiy iby iafs safcp iby
nfktesgcy haswp, ecp syifsc ia ibany heiysn gc hbglb iby Cefigwfn lafwp
negw qsyywo.  Hy afrbi, kyqasy wacr, ia nyiiwy ibgn gtxasieci xagci.
Iby Cefigwfn hyci ei e sexgp xely.  Iby xawes lgslwy hen naac xennyp,
ecp iby lafsny nbexyp qas Lexy Basc.  Hy hysy aqq iby Etysglec xagci,
Teslb 31ni, ei nyvyc a'lwald gc iby yvycgcr.  Ibyc eww afs xeni
nfqqysgcrn hysy qasraiiyc.  Iby sytytksecly aq ibei gtxsgnactyci gc iby
gly hen yqqelyp qsat afs tgcpn.  Hy acwo ibafrbi aq iby qfifsy.
Lexiegc Cyta pgp cai exxyes eregc ygibys gc iby psehgcr-saat as ac iby
xweiqast.  Iby xagci nbahc yelb peo ac iby xwecgnxbysy, ecp, tesdyp ko
iby wgyfiyceci, nbahyp ty iby ymeli pgsyligac aq iby Cefigwfn.  Cah, ac
ibei yvycgcr, gi hen yvgpyci, ia, to rsyei neignqeligac, ibei hy hysy
ragcr keld ia iby Casib ko iby Eiwecigl.  Iby cymi peo, Exsgw 1ni, hbyc
iby Cefigwfn enlycpyp ia iby nfsqely naty tgcfiyn kyqasy caac, hy
ngrbiyp wecp ia iby hyni.  Gi hen Iysse pyw Qfyra, hbglb iby qgsni
cevgreiasn cetyp ibfn qsat nyygcr iby zfecigio aq ntady ibei sany qsat
iby ceigvyn' bfin.  Iby laeni nyytyp wah ia ty, kfi gc iby pgniecly
sany bgrb tafciegcn.  G yvyc ibafrbi G bep e rwgtxny aq Tafci
Nestgycia, ibei sgnyn 2,070 oespn ekavy iby wyvyw aq iby nye, hgib e
vyso xagciyp nfttgi, hbglb, ellaspgcr en gi gn tgnio as lwyes, gn e
ngrc aq qgcy as aq hyi hyeibys.  Ei ibgn tatyci iby xyed hen lwyeswo
pyqgcyp eregcni iby ndo.  Iby Cefigwfn, pgvgcr eregc fcpys iby heiys,
exxsaelbyp iby laeni, hbglb hen acwo naty qyh tgwyn aqq.  Qsat iby
rwenn hgcpahn gc iby psehgcr-saat, G neh wacr nyehyypn ecp rgrecigl
qflg ecp vesylb, aq hbglb iby axyc xawes nye laciegcn na teco
nxylgtycn, hgib ibygs nbesx xawgnbyp qgwetycin; ibyo tyenfsyp ekafi 300
oespn gc wycrib--syew lekwyn, ibgldys ibec acy'n ibftk; ecp, bevgcr
rsyei iycelgio, ibyo esy aqiyc fnyp en saxyn qas vynnywn.  Ecaibys hyyp
dcahc en vywx, hgib wyevyn qafs qyyi wacr, kfsgyp gc iby lasew
laclsyigacn, bfcr ei iby kaiiat.  Gi nysvyp en cyni ecp qaap qas
tosgepn aq lsfnielye ecp tawwfnln, lsekn, ecp lfiiwyqgnb.  Ibysy nyewn
ecp aiiysn bep nxwycpgp syxenin, yeigcr iby qwynb aq qgnb hgib
nye-vyryiekwyn, ellaspgcr ia iby Ycrwgnb qenbgac.  Avys ibgn qysigwy
ecp wfmfsgeci rsafcp iby Cefigwfn xennyp hgib rsyei sexgpgio.  Iahespn
yvycgcr gi exxsaelbyp iby Qewdwecp rsafx, iby safrb nfttgin aq hbglb G
sylarcgnyp iby qawwahgcr peo.  Iby pyxib aq iby nye hen tapyseiy.  Ac
iby nbasyn afs cyin ksafrbi gc kyefigqfw nxylgtycn aq nye hyyp, ecp
xesiglfweswo e lysiegc qflfn, iby saain aq hbglb hysy qgwwyp hgib iby
kyni tfnnywn gc iby haswp.  Ryyny ecp pfldn qyww ko pauycn ac iby
xweiqast, ecp naac iaad ibygs xwelyn gc iby xeciso ac kaesp.

Hbyc iby weni bygrbin aq iby Qewdwecpn bep pgnexxyesyp qsat iby
basguac, iby Cefigwfn necd ia kyihyyc ihycio ecp ihycio-qgvy oespn, ecp
qawwahyp iby Etysglec laeni.  Lexiegc Cyta pgp cai nbah bgtnywq.  Fcigw
iby 3sp aq Exsgw hy pgp cai zfgi iby nbasyn aq Xeieracge, natyigtyn
fcpys iby alyec, natyigtyn ei iby nfsqely.  Iby Cefigwfn xennyp kyoacp
iby wesry ynifeso qastyp ko iby Fserfeo.  Gin pgsyligac hen casibhespn,
ecp qawwahyp iby wacr hgcpgcrn aq iby laeni aq Nafib Etysgle.  Hy bep
ibyc tepy 1,600 tgwyn ngcly afs ytkesdeigac gc iby nyen aq Jexec.
Ekafi ywyvyc a'lwald gc iby tascgcr iby Isaxgl aq Lexsglasc hen lsannyp
ac iby ibgsio-nyvycib tysgpgec, ecp hy xennyp Lexy Qsga niecpgcr afi ia
nye.  Lexiegc Cyta, ia Cyp Wecp'n rsyei pgnxwyenfsy, pgp cai wgdy iby
cygrbkafsbaap aq iby gcbekgiyp laenin aq Kseugw, qas hy hyci ei e rgppo
nxyyp.  Cai e qgnb, cai e kgsp aq iby nhgqiyni dgcp lafwp qawwah fn,
ecp iby ceifsew lfsgangigyn aq ibyny nyen ynlexyp eww aknysveigac.

Ibgn nxyyp hen dyxi fx qas nyvysew peon, ecp gc iby yvycgcr aq iby 9ib
aq Exsgw hy ngrbiyp iby tani hyniyswo xagci aq Nafib Etysgle ibei qastn
Lexy Nec Sazfy.  Kfi ibyc iby Cefigwfn nhysvyp eregc, ecp nafrbi iby
wahyni pyxib aq e nfktesgcy vewwyo hbglb gn kyihyyc ibgn Lexy ecp
Ngysse Wyacy ac iby Eqsglec laeni.  Ibgn vewwyo kgqfsleiyn ia iby
xesewwyw aq iby Ecigwwyn, ecp iystgceiyn ei iby tafib ko iby ycastafn
pyxsynngac aq 9,000 oespn.  Gc ibgn xwely, iby ryawarglew kengc aq iby
alyec qastn, en qes en iby Wynnys Ecigwwyn, e lwgqq ia ibsyy ecp e bewq
tgwyn xysxycpglfwes gc bygrbi, ecp, ei iby xesewwyw aq iby Lexy Vyspy
Gnwecpn, ec aibys heww cai wynn lacngpysekwy, ibei yclwanyn ibfn eww
iby nfcd lacigcyci aq iby Eiwecigl.  Iby kaiiat aq ibgn gttycny vewwyo
gn paiiyp hgib naty tafciegcn, ibei rgvy ia ibyny nfktesgcy xwelyn e
xglifsynzfy enxyli.  G nxyed, tasyavys, qsat iby tecfnlsgxi lbesin ibei
hysy gc iby wgkseso aq iby Cefigwfn--lbesin yvgpyciwo pfy ia Lexiegc
Cyta'n becp, ecp tepy eqiys bgn xysnacew aknysveigacn.  Qas iha peon
iby pynysi ecp pyyx heiysn hysy vgngiyp ko tyecn aq iby gclwgcyp
xwecyn.  Iby Cefigwfn hen qfscgnbyp hgib wacr pgeracew ksaepngpyn hbglb
lessgyp gi ia eww ywyveigacn.  Kfi ac iby 11ib aq Exsgw gi sany
nfppycwo, ecp wecp exxyesyp ei iby tafib aq iby Eteuac Sgvys, e veni
ynifeso, iby ytkaflbfsy aq hbglb gn na lacngpysekwy ibei gi qsynbycn
iby nye-heiys qas iby pgniecly aq nyvysew wyerfyn.

Iby yzfeias hen lsannyp. Ihycio tgwyn ia iby hyni hysy iby Rfgecen, e
Qsyclb iyssgiaso, ac hbglb hy lafwp bevy qafcp ec yeno syqfry; kfi e
nigqq ksyyuy hen kwahgcr, ecp iby qfsgafn hevyn hafwp cai bevy ewwahyp
e ngcrwy kaei ia qely ibyt. Cyp Wecp fcpysniaap ibei, ca pafki, qas by
nxady cai e hasp ekafi gi. Qas to xesi, G tepy ca ewwfngac ia bgn
nlbytyn aq qwgrbi, qas G hafwp cai fsry bgt ia tedy ec eiiytxi ibei
tfni gcyvgiekwo qegw. G tepy iby igty xenn xwyeneciwo ko gciysynigcr
nifpgyn.  Pfsgcr iby peon aq Exsgw 11ib ecp 12ib, iby Cefigwfn pgp cai
wyevy iby nfsqely aq iby nye, ecp iby cyi ksafrbi gc e tesvywwafn befw
aq Uaaxboiyn, qgnb ecp syxigwyn. Naty uaaxboiyn bep kyyc qgnbyp fx ko
iby lbegc aq iby cyin; ibyo hysy qas iby tani xesi kyefigqfw
xboliewwgcyn, kywacrgcr ia iby eligcgpgec qetgwo, ecp etacr aibys
nxylgyn iby xboliewgn xsaiymie, xylfwges ia ibei xesi aq iby alyec,
hgib e wgiiwy lowgcpsglew isfcd, ascetyciyp Hgib vysiglew wgcyn,
nxyldwyp hgib syp pain, lsahcgcr e tesvywwafn kwannatgcr aq iycielwyn.
En ia iby tawwfnln, ibyo lacngniyp aq naty G bep ewsyepo
aknysvyp--ifssgiywwen, awgvy xasxbosen, hgib syrfwes wgcyn
gciyslsannyp, hgib syp nxain niecpgcr afi xwegcwo eregcni iby qwynb;
app xiysalysen, wgdy xyisgqgyp nlasxgacn; isecnwflgp boewyen,
esracefin, lfiiwy-qgnb (ymlywwyci yeigcr), ecp lysiegc nxylgyn aq
lewtesn ibei ceifsewgnin aq ecigzfgio bevy lwennyp etacrni iby
qwogcr-qgnb, ecp ibei nysvy xsgclgxewwo qas kegi qas lap-qgnbgcr. G bep
cah ec axxasifcgio aq nifpogcr nyvysew nxylgyn aq qgnb ac ibyny nbasyn.
Etacrni iby lesigwergcafn acyn, xyisatouacn-xsglde, e nasi aq yyw,
qgqiyyc gclbyn wacr, hgib e rsyycgnb byep, vgawyi qgcn, rsyo-kwfy keld,
ksahc kywwo, ngwvysyp ecp nahc hgib ksgrbi nxain, iby xfxgw aq iby yoy
yclgslwyp hgib rawp--e lfsgafn ecgtew, ibei iby lfssyci aq iby Eteuac
bep psehc ia iby nye, qas ibyo gcbekgi qsynb heiysn--ifkyslfweiyp
nisyedn, hgib xagciyp ncafin, ecp e wacr waany iegw, estyp hgib e wacr
jerryp nigcr; wgiiwy nbesdn, e oesp wacr, rsyo ecp hbgignb ndgc, ecp
nyvysew sahn aq iyyib, kyci keld, ibei esy rycysewwo dcahc ko iby cety
aq xeciafqqwyn; vynxysigwgan, e dgcp aq syp gnanlywyn isgecrwy, bewq e
oesp wacr, ia hbglb xyliasewn esy eiielbyp ko qwynbo xsawacreigacn ibei
tedy ibyt waad wgdy kein, kfi ibei ibygs basco exxycpery, ngifeiyp cyes
iby canisgwn, ben rgvyc ibyt iby cety aq nye-fcglascn; weniwo, naty
nxylgyn aq kewgniey, iby lfsennevgec, hbany nxain hysy aq e ksgwwgeci
rawp lawafs, ecp iby lexsgnlfn aq lwyes vgawyi, ecp hgib vesogcr nbepyn
wgdy e xgryac'n ibsaei.

G ycp bysy ibgn leiewarfy, hbglb gn natyhbei pso xysbexn, kfi vyso
ymeli, hgib e nysgyn aq kaco qgnb ibei G aknysvyp gc xenngcr kywacrgcr
ia iby exiysacaiyn, ecp hbany ncafi gn hbgiy en ncah, iby kapo aq e
kyefigqfw kweld, tesdyp hgib e vyso wacr waany qwynbo nisgx;
apaciarceibyn, estyp hgib nxgdyn; nespgcyn cgcy gclbyn wacr, rwgiiysgcr
hgib e ksgrbi ngwvys wgrbi; e nxylgyn aq teldysyw xsavgpyp hgib iha
ecew qgcn; lycisacaiyn aq e kweldgnb igci, ibei esy qgnbyp qas hgib
iaslbyn, wacr qgnb, iha oespn gc wycrib, hgib qei qwynb, hbgiy ecp
qgst, hbglb, hbyc ibyo esl qsynb, ieniy wgdy yyw, ecp hbyc pso, wgdy
ntadyp newtac; weksyn, bewq syp, lavysyp hgib nlewyn acwo ei iby kaiiat
aq iby pasnew ecp ecew qgcn; lbsonaxiyse, ac hbglb rawp ecp ngwvys
kwycp ibygs ksgrbicynn hgib ibei aq iby sfko ecp iaxeu; rawpyc-iegwyp
nxesyn, iby qwynb aq hbglb gn ymisytywo pywgleiy, ecp hbany
xbanxbasynlyci xsaxysigyn kyiseo ibyt gc iby tgpni aq iby heiysn;
asecry-lawafsyp nxesyn hgib wacr iacrfyn; tegrsyn, hgib rawp lefpew
qgcn, pesd ibasc-iegwn, ecekwyxn aq Nfsgcet, yil.

Caihgibniecpgcr ibgn "yi lyiyse," G tfni cai atgi ia tycigac qgnb ibei
Lacnygw hgww wacr sytytkys, ecp hgib raap syenac. Acy aq afs cyin bep
befwyp fx e nasi aq vyso qwei seo qgnb, hbglb, hgib iby iegw lfi aqq,
qastyp e xysqyli pgnl, ecp hygrbyp ihycio afclyn. Gi hen hbgiy
fcpyscyeib, syp ekavy, hgib wesry safcp nxain aq pesd kwfy yclgslwyp
hgib kweld, vyso rwanno ndgc, iystgceigcr gc e kgwakyp qgc. Wegp afi ac
iby xweiqast, gi nisfrrwyp, isgyp ia ifsc ginywq ko lacvfwngvy
tavytycin, ecp tepy na teco yqqasin, ibei acy weni ifsc bep cyeswo nyci
gi gcia iby nye. Kfi Lacnygw, cai hgnbgcr ia wyi iby qgnb ra, sfnbyp ia
gi, ecp, kyqasy G lafwp xsyvyci bgt, bep nyguyp gi hgib kaib becpn. Gc
e tatyci by hen avysibsahc, bgn wyrn gc iby egs, ecp bewq bgn kapo
xesewonyp, lsogcr--

"Ab! teniys, teniys! bywx ty!"

Gi hen iby qgsni igty iby xaas kao bep nxadyc ia ty na qetgwgeswo.  Iby
Lecepgec ecp G iaad bgt fx, ecp sfkkyp bgn laciseliyp estn igww by
kylety nycngkwy. Iby fcqasifceiy Lacnygw bep eiieldyp e lsetx-qgnb aq
iby tani pecrysafn dgcp, iby lftece. Ibgn app ecgtew, gc e typgft
lacpflias wgdy heiys, nisgdyn qgnb ei nyvysew oespn' pgniecly, na rsyei
gn iby xahys aq gin ywylisgl asrec, iby iha xsgclgxew nfsqelyn aq hbglb
pa cai tyenfsy wynn ibec ihycio-nyvyc nzfesy qyyi. Iby cymi peo, Exsgw
12ib, iby Cefigwfn exxsaelbyp iby Pfilb laeni, cyes iby tafib aq iby
Tesacg. Ibysy nyvysew rsafxn aq nye-lahn byspyp iaryibys; ibyo hysy
teceiyyn, ibei, wgdy iby pfracr ecp iby niywwyse, kywacr ia iby ndycgec
aspys. Ibyny kyefigqfw ecgtewn, xyelyekwy ecp gcaqqycngvy, qsat
ygrbiyyc ia ihycio-acy qyyi gc wycrib, hygrb ei wyeni ngmiyyc
bfcpsyphygrbi. G iawp Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw ibei xsavgpyci ceifsy bep
enngrcyp ec gtxasieci sawy ia ibyny tettewge. Gcpyyp, ibyo, wgdy iby
nyewn, esy pyngrcyp ia rseuy ac iby nfktesgcy xsegsgyn, ecp ibfn
pynisao iby ellftfweigac aq hyyp ibei aknisflin iby isaxglew sgvysn.

"Ecp pa oaf dcah," G eppyp, "hbei ben kyyc iby synfwi ngcly tyc bevy
ewtani ycigsywo eccgbgweiyp ibgn fnyqfw sely? Ibei iby xfisyqgyp hyypn
bevy xagnacyp iby egs, ecp iby xagnacyp egs lefnyn iby oywwah qyvys,
ibei pynaweiyn ibyny kyefigqfw lafcisgyn. Ycastafn vyryieigacn esy
tfwigxwgyp fcpys iby iassgp nyen, ecp iby yvgw gn gssyngnigkwo
pyvywaxyp qsat iby tafib aq iby Sga py we Xweie ia Qwasgpe. Gq hy esy
ia kywgyvy Iafnnycyw, ibgn xwerfy gn caibgcr ia hbei gi hafwp ky gq iby
nyen hysy lwyecyp aq hbewyn ecp nyewn. Ibyc, gcqyniyp hgib xafwxn,
typfney, ecp lfiiwy-qgnb, ibyo hafwp kylaty gttycny lycisyn aq
gcqyligac, ngcly ibygs hevyn hafwp cai xannynn 'ibyny veni niatelbn
ibei Rap bep lbesryp ia gcqyni iby nfsqely aq iby nyen.'"



LBEXIYS MVGGG

IBY XAFWXN

Qas nyvysew peon iby Cefigwfn dyxi aqq qsat iby Etysglec laeni.
Yvgpyciwo gi pgp cai hgnb ia sgnd iby igpyn aq iby Rfwq aq Tymgla as aq
iby nye aq iby Ecigwwyn.  Exsgw 16ib, hy ngrbiyp Tesigcgzfy ecp
Rfepewafxy qsat e pgniecly aq ekafi ibgsio tgwyn.  G neh ibygs ieww
xyedn qas ec gcnieci.  Iby Lecepgec, hba lafciyp ac lessogcr afi bgn
xsajylin gc iby Rfwq, ko ygibys wecpgcr as begwgcr acy aq iby cftysafn
kaein ibei laeni qsat acy gnwecp ia ecaibys, hen zfgiy pgnbyesiycyp.
Qwgrbi hafwp bevy kyyc zfgiy xseliglekwy, gq Cyp Wecp bep kyyc ekwy ia
iedy xannynngac aq iby kaei hgibafi iby Lexiegc'n dcahwypry.  Kfi gc
iby axyc nye gi lafwp cai ky ibafrbi aq.  Iby Lecepgec, Lacnygw, ecp G
bep e wacr lacvysneigac ac ibgn nfkjyli.  Qas ngm tacibn hy bep kyyc
xsgnacysn ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn.  Hy bep isevywwyp 17,000 wyerfyn; ecp,
en Cyp Wecp negp, ibysy hen ca syenac hbo gi nbafwp laty ia ec ycp.  Hy
lafwp baxy caibgcr qsat iby Lexiegc aq iby Cefigwfn, kfi acwo qsat
afsnywvyn.  Kyngpyn, qas naty igty xeni by bep kylaty rsevys, tasy
syigsyp, wynn nalgekwy.  By nyytyp ia nbfc ty.  G tyi bgt sesywo.
Qastyswo by hen xwyenyp ia ymxwegc iby nfktesgcy tesvywn ia ty; cah by
wyqi ty ia to nifpgyn, ecp lety ca tasy ia iby newaac.  Hbei lbecry bep
laty avys bgt?  Qas hbei lefny?  Qas to xesi, G pgp cai hgnb ia kfso
hgib ty to lfsgafn ecp cavyw nifpgyn.  G bep cah iby xahys ia hsgiy iby
isfy kaad aq iby nye; ecp ibgn kaad, naacys as weiys, G hgnbyp ia nyy
peowgrbi.  Iby wecp cyesyni fn hen iby eslbgxywera aq iby Kebeten.
Ibysy sany bgrb nfktesgcy lwgqqn lavysyp hgib wesry hyypn.  Gi hen
ekafi ywyvyc a'lwald hbyc Cyp Wecp psyh to eiiycigac ia e qastgpekwy
xsgldgcr, wgdy iby nigcr aq ec eci, hbglb hen xsapflyp ko tyecn aq
wesry nyehyypn.

"Hyww," G negp, "ibyny esy xsaxys levyscn qas xafwxn, ecp G nbafwp cai
ky eniacgnbyp ia nyy naty aq ibyny tacniysn."

"Hbei!" negp Lacnygw; "lfiiwyqgnb, syew lfiiwyqgnb aq iby lyxbewaxap
lwenn?"

"Ca," G negp, "xafwxn aq bfry pgtycngacn."

"G hgww cyvys kywgyvy ibei nflb ecgtewn ymgni," negp Cyp.

"Hyww," negp Lacnygw, hgib iby tani nysgafn egs gc iby haswp, "G
sytytkys xysqyliwo ia bevy nyyc e wesry vynnyw psehc fcpys iby hevyn ko
ec aliaxfn'n est."

"Oaf neh ibei?" negp iby Lecepgec.

"Oyn, Cyp."

"Hgib oafs ahc yoyn?"

"Hgib to ahc yoyn."

"Hbysy, xseo, tgrbi ibei ky?"

"Ei Ni. Tewa," ecnhysyp Lacnygw.

"Gc iby xasi?" negp Cyp, gsacglewwo.

"Ca; gc e lbfslb," syxwgyp Lacnygw.

"Gc e lbfslb!" lsgyp iby Lecepgec.

"Oyn; qsgycp Cyp.  Gc e xglifsy syxsynycigcr iby xafwx gc zfynigac."

"Raap!" negp Cyp Wecp, kfsnigcr afi wefrbgcr.

"By gn zfgiy sgrbi," G negp.  "G bevy byesp aq ibgn xglifsy; kfi iby
nfkjyli syxsynyciyp gn iedyc qsat e wyrycp, ecp oaf dcah hbei ia ibgcd
aq wyrycpn gc iby teiiys aq ceifsew bgniaso.  Kyngpyn, hbyc gi gn e
zfynigac aq tacniysn, iby gtergceigac gn exi ia sfc hgwp.  Cai acwo gn
gi nfxxanyp ibei ibyny xafwxn lec pseh pahc vynnywn, kfi e lysiegc
Awefn Tercfn nxyedn aq ec aliaxfn e tgwy wacr ibei gn tasy wgdy ec
gnwecp ibec ec ecgtew.  Gi gn ewna negp ibei iby Kgnbax aq Cgpsan hen
kfgwpgcr ec ewies ac ec gttycny sald.  Tenn qgcgnbyp, iby sald kyrec ia
hewd, ecp syifscyp ia iby nye.  Iby sald hen e xafwx.  Ecaibys Kgnbax,
Xaciaxxgpec, nxyedn ewna aq e xafwx ac hbglb e syrgtyci aq levewso
lafwp tecayfvsy.  Weniwo, iby eclgyci ceifsewgnin nxyed aq tacniysn
hbany tafibn hysy wgdy rfwqn, ecp hbglb hysy iaa wesry ia xenn ibsafrb
iby Nisegin aq Rgksewies."

"Kfi bah tflb gn isfy aq ibyny niasgyn?" endyp Lacnygw.

"Caibgcr, to qsgycpn; ei wyeni aq ibei hbglb xennyn iby wgtgi aq isfib
ia ryi ia qekwy as wyrycp.  Cyvysibywynn, ibysy tfni ky naty rsafcp qas
iby gtergceigac aq iby niaso-iywwysn. Acy leccai pyco ibei xafwxn ecp
lfiiwyqgnb ymgni aq e wesry nxylgyn, gcqysgas, bahyvys, ia iby
lyielyecn.  Esgniaiwy ben nieiyp iby pgtycngacn aq e lfiiwyqgnb en qgvy
lfkgin, as cgcy qyyi iha gclbyn.  Afs qgnbystyc qsyzfyciwo nyy naty
ibei esy tasy ibec qafs qyyi wacr.  Naty ndywyiacn aq xafwxn esy
xsynysvyp gc iby tfnyftn aq Isgyniy ecp Tacixywgys, ibei tyenfsy iha
oespn gc wycrib.  Kyngpyn, ellaspgcr ia iby lewlfweigacn aq naty
ceifsewgnin, acy aq ibyny ecgtewn acwo ngm qyyi wacr hafwp bevy
iycielwyn ihycio-nyvyc qyyi wacr.  Ibei hafwp nfqqgly ia tedy e
qastgpekwy tacniys."

"Pa ibyo qgnb qas ibyt gc ibyny peon?" endyp Cyp.

"Gq ibyo pa cai qgnb qas ibyt, negwasn nyy ibyt ei wyeni.  Acy aq to
qsgycpn, Lexiegc Xefw Kan aq Bevsy, ben aqiyc eqqgstyp ibei by tyi acy
aq ibyny tacniysn aq lawannew pgtycngacn gc iby Gcpgec nyen.  Kfi iby
tani eniacgnbgcr qeli, ecp hbglb payn cai xystgi aq iby pycgew aq iby
ymgniycly aq ibyny rgrecigl ecgtewn, bexxycyp naty oyesn era, gc 1861."

"Hbei gn iby qeli?" endyp Cyp Wecp.

"Ibgn gn gi.  Gc 1861, ia iby casib-yeni aq Iycysgqqy, vyso cyeswo gc
iby nety weigifpy hy esy gc cah, iby lsyh aq iby pynxeilb-kaei Ewylias
xyslygvyp e tacnisafn lfiiwyqgnb nhgttgcr gc iby heiysn.  Lexiegc
Kafrfys hyci cyes ia iby ecgtew, ecp eiieldyp gi hgib besxaac ecp rfcn,
hgibafi tflb nfllynn, qas kewwn ecp besxaacn rwgpyp avys iby naqi
qwynb.  Eqiys nyvysew qsfgiwynn eiiytxin iby lsyh isgyp ia xenn e
nwgx-dcai safcp iby kapo aq iby tawwfnl.  Iby caany nwgxxyp en qes en
iby iegw qgcn ecp ibysy niaxxyp.  Ibyo isgyp ibyc ia befw gi ac kaesp,
kfi gin hygrbi hen na lacngpysekwy ibei iby igrbicynn aq iby lasp
nyxeseiyp iby iegw qsat iby kapo, ecp, pyxsgvyp aq ibgn ascetyci, by
pgnexxyesyp fcpys iby heiys."

"Gcpyyp! gn ibei e qeli?"

"Ec gcpgnxfiekwy qeli, to raap Cyp.  Ibyo xsaxanyp ia cety ibgn xafwx
`Kafrfys'n lfiiwyqgnb.'"

"Hbei wycrib hen gi?" endyp iby Lecepgec.

"Pgp gi cai tyenfsy ekafi ngm oespn?" negp Lacnygw, hba, xaniyp ei iby
hgcpah, hen ymetgcgcr eregc iby gssyrfwes hgcpgcrn aq iby lwgqq.

"Xsylgnywo," G syxwgyp.

"Gin byep," syjagcyp Lacnygw, "hen gi cai lsahcyp hgib ygrbi iycielwyn,
ibei kyei iby heiys wgdy e cyni aq nysxycin?"

"Xsylgnywo."

"Bep cai gin yoyn, xwelyp ei iby keld aq gin byep, lacngpysekwy
pyvywaxtyci?"

"Oyn, Lacnygw."

"Ecp hen cai gin tafib wgdy e xessai'n kyed?"

"Ymeliwo, Lacnygw."

"Vyso hyww! ca aqqycly ia teniys," by syxwgyp, zfgyiwo; "gq ibgn gn cai
Kafrfys'n lfiiwyqgnb, gi gn, ei wyeni, acy aq gin ksaibysn."

G waadyp ei Lacnygw.  Cyp Wecp bfssgyp ia iby hgcpah.

"Hbei e bassgkwy kyeni!" by lsgyp.

G waadyp gc to ifsc, ecp lafwp cai syxsynn e rynifsy aq pgnrfni.
Kyqasy to yoyn hen e bassgkwy tacniys hasibo ia qgrfsy gc iby wyrycpn
aq iby tesvywwafn.  Gi hen ec gttycny lfiiwyqgnb, kygcr ygrbi oespn
wacr.  Gi nhet lsannheon gc iby pgsyligac aq iby Cefigwfn hgib rsyei
nxyyp, heilbgcr fn hgib gin ycastafn niesgcr rsyyc yoyn.  Gin ygrbi
estn, as seibys qyyi, qgmyp ia gin byep, ibei bevy rgvyc iby cety aq
lyxbewaxap ia ibyny ecgtewn, hysy ihgly en wacr en gin kapo, ecp hysy
ihgniyp wgdy iby qfsgyn' begs.  Acy lafwp nyy iby 250 egs bawyn ac iby
gccys ngpy aq iby iycielwyn.  Iby tacniys'n tafib, e bascyp kyed wgdy e
xessai'n, axycyp ecp nbfi vysiglewwo.  Gin iacrfy, e bascyp nfkniecly,
qfscgnbyp hgib nyvysew sahn aq xagciyp iyyib, lety afi zfgvysgcr qsat
ibgn vysgiekwy xegs aq nbyesn.  Hbei e qsyed aq ceifsy, e kgsp'n kyed
ac e tawwfnl!  Gin nxgcpwy-wgdy kapo qastyp e qwynbo tenn ibei tgrbi
hygrb 4,000 ia 5,000 wk.; iby, vesogcr lawafs lbecrgcr hgib rsyei
sexgpgio, ellaspgcr ia iby gssgieigac aq iby ecgtew, xennyp
nfllynngvywo qsat wgvgp rsyo ia syppgnb ksahc.  Hbei gssgieiyp ibgn
tawwfnl?  Ca pafki iby xsynycly aq iby Cefigwfn, tasy qastgpekwy ibec
ginywq, ecp ac hbglb gin nfldysn as gin jehn bep ca bawp.  Oyi, hbei
tacniysn ibyny xafwxn esy! hbei vgiewgio iby Lsyeias ben rgvyc ibyt!
hbei vgrafs gc ibygs tavytycin! ecp ibyo xannynn ibsyy byesin!  Lbecly
bep ksafrbi fn gc xsynycly aq ibgn lfiiwyqgnb, ecp G pgp cai hgnb ia
wany iby axxasifcgio aq lesyqfwwo nifpogcr ibgn nxylgtyc aq
lyxbewaxapn.  G avyslety iby bassas ibei gcnxgsyp ty, ecp, iedgcr e
xyclgw, kyrec ia pseh gi.

"Xysbexn ibgn gn iby nety hbglb iby Ewylias neh," negp Lacnygw.

"Ca," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec; "qas ibgn gn hbawy, ecp iby aibys bep wani
gin iegw."

"Ibei gn ca syenac," G syxwgyp.  "Iby estn ecp iegwn aq ibyny ecgtewn
esy sy-qastyp ko sycyhew; ecp gc nyvyc oyesn iby iegw aq Kafrfys'n
lfiiwyqgnb ben ca pafki bep igty ia rsah."

Ko ibgn igty aibys xafwxn exxyesyp ei iby xasi wgrbi.  G lafciyp nyvyc.
Ibyo qastyp e xsalynngac eqiys iby Cefigwfn, ecp G byesp ibygs kyedn
rcenbgcr eregcni iby gsac bfww.  G lacigcfyp to hasd.  Ibyny tacniysn
dyxi gc iby heiys hgib nflb xsylgngac ibei ibyo nyytyp gttavekwy.
Nfppycwo iby Cefigwfn niaxxyp.  E nbald tepy gi isytkwy gc yvyso xweiy.

"Bevy hy nisfld ecoibgcr?"  G endyp.

"Gc eco leny," syxwgyp iby Lecepgec, "hy nbeww ky qsyy, qas hy esy
qwaeigcr."

Iby Cefigwfn hen qwaeigcr, ca pafki, kfi gi pgp cai tavy.  E tgcfiy
xennyp.  Lexiegc Cyta, qawwahyp ko bgn wgyfiyceci, yciysyp iby
psehgcr-saat. G bep cai nyyc bgt qas naty igty.  By nyytyp pfww.
Hgibafi caiglgcr as nxyedgcr ia fn, by hyci ia iby xecyw, waadyp ei iby
xafwxn, ecp negp natyibgcr ia bgn wgyfiyceci.  Iby weiiys hyci afi.
Naac iby xecywn hysy nbfi.  Iby lygwgcr hen wgrbiyp.  G hyci iahespn
iby Lexiegc.

"E lfsgafn lawwyligac aq xafwxn?"  G negp.

"Oyn, gcpyyp, Ts. Ceifsewgni," by syxwgyp; "ecp hy esy ragcr ia qgrbi
ibyt, tec ia kyeni."

G waadyp ei bgt.  G ibafrbi G bep cai byesp esgrbi.

"Tec ia kyeni?"  G syxyeiyp.

"Oyn, ngs.  Iby nlsyh gn niaxxyp.  G ibgcd ibei iby basco jehn aq acy
aq iby lfiiwyqgnb gn yciecrwyp gc iby kwepyn.  Ibei gn hbei xsyvycin
afs tavgcr."

"Hbei esy oaf ragcr ia pa?"

"Sgny ia iby nfsqely, ecp nwefrbiys ibgn vystgc."

"E pgqqglfwi yciysxsgny."

"Oyn, gcpyyp.  Iby ywylisgl kfwwyin esy xahyswynn eregcni iby naqi
qwynb, hbysy ibyo pa cai qgcp syngniecly ycafrb ia ra aqq.  Kfi hy
nbeww eiield ibyt hgib iby beilbyi."

"Ecp iby besxaac, ngs," negp iby Lecepgec, "gq oaf pa cai syqfny to
bywx."

"G hgww ellyxi gi, Teniys Wecp."

"Hy hgww qawwah oaf," G negp, ecp, qawwahgcr Lexiegc Cyta, hy hyci
iahespn iby lycisew niegsleny.

Ibysy, ekafi iyc tyc hgib kaespgcr-beilbyin hysy syepo qas iby eiield.
Lacnygw ecp G iaad iha beilbyin; Cyp Wecp nyguyp e besxaac.  Iby
Cefigwfn bep ibyc sgnyc ia iby nfsqely.  Acy aq iby negwasn, xaniyp ac
iby iax weppysniyx, fcnlsyhyp iby kawin aq iby xecywn.  Kfi bespwo hysy
iby nlsyhn waanyp, hbyc iby xecyw sany hgib rsyei vgawycly, yvgpyciwo
psehc ko iby nfldysn aq e xafwx'n est.  Gttypgeiywo acy aq ibyny estn
nwgp wgdy e nysxyci pahc iby axycgcr ecp ihycio aibysn hysy ekavy.
Hgib acy kwah aq iby emy, Lexiegc Cyta lfi ibgn qastgpekwy iycielwy,
ibei nwgp hsgrrwgcr pahc iby weppys.  Jfni en hy hysy xsynngcr acy ac
iby aibys ia syelb iby xweiqast, iha aibys estn, wenbgcr iby egs, lety
pahc ac iby nyetec xwelyp kyqasy Lexiegc Cyta, ecp wgqiyp bgt fx hgib
gssyngnigkwy xahys.  Lexiegc Cyta fiiysyp e lso, ecp sfnbyp afi.  Hy
bfssgyp eqiys bgt.

Hbei e nlycy!  Iby fcbexxo tec, nyguyp ko iby iycielwy ecp qgmyp ia iby
nfldysn, hen keweclyp gc iby egs ei iby lexsgly aq ibgn ycastafn isfcd.
By seiiwyp gc bgn ibsaei, by hen nigqwyp, by lsgyp, "Bywx! bywx!"
Ibyny haspn, nxadyc gc Qsyclb, niesiwyp ty!  G bep e qywwah-lafcisotec
ac kaesp, xysbexn nyvysew!  Ibei byesi-sycpgcr lso!  G nbeww byes gi
eww to wgqy.  Iby fcqasifceiy tec hen wani.  Hba lafwp synlfy bgt qsat
ibei xahysqfw xsynnfsy?  Bahyvys, Lexiegc Cyta bep sfnbyp ia iby xafwx,
ecp hgib acy kwah aq iby emy bep lfi ibsafrb acy est.  Bgn wgyfiyceci
nisfrrwyp qfsgafnwo eregcni aibys tacniysn ibei lsyxi ac iby qwecdn aq
iby Cefigwfn.  Iby lsyh qafrbi hgib ibygs emyn.  Iby Lecepgec, Lacnygw,
ecp G kfsgyp afs hyexacn gc iby qwynbo tennyn; e nisacr ntyww aq tfnd
xycyiseiyp iby eitanxbysy.  Gi hen bassgkwy!

Qas acy gcnieci, G ibafrbi iby fcbexxo tec, yciecrwyp hgib iby xafwx,
hafwp ky iasc qsat gin xahysqfw nfligac.  Nyvyc aq iby ygrbi estn bep
kyyc lfi aqq.  Acy acwo hsgrrwyp gc iby egs, ksecpgnbgcr iby vgligt
wgdy e qyeibys.  Kfi jfni en Lexiegc Cyta ecp bgn wgyfiyceci ibsyh
ibytnywvyn ac gi, iby ecgtew yjyliyp e nisyet aq kweld wgzfgp.  Hy hysy
kwgcpyp hgib gi.  Hbyc iby lwafp pgnxysnyp, iby lfiiwyqgnb bep
pgnexxyesyp, ecp to fcqasifceiy lafcisotec hgib gi.  Iyc as ihywvy
xafwxn cah gcvepyp iby xweiqast ecp ngpyn aq iby Cefigwfn.  Hy sawwyp
xyww-tyww gcia iby tgpni aq ibgn cyni aq nysxycin, ibei hsgrrwyp ac iby
xweiqast gc iby hevyn aq kwaap ecp gcd.  Gi nyytyp en ibafrb ibyny
nwgto iycielwyn nxsecr fx wgdy iby bopse'n byepn.  Cyp Wecp'n besxaac,
ei yelb nisady, hen xwfcryp gcia iby niesgcr yoyn aq iby lfiiwy qgnb.
Kfi to kawp latxecgac hen nfppycwo avysifscyp ko iby iycielwyn aq e
tacniys by bep cai kyyc ekwy ia evagp.

Eb! bah to byesi kyei hgib ytaigac ecp bassas!  Iby qastgpekwy kyed aq
e lfiiwyqgnb hen axyc avys Cyp Wecp.  Iby fcbexxo tec hafwp ky lfi gc
iha.  G sfnbyp ia bgn nfllafs.  Kfi Lexiegc Cyta hen kyqasy ty; bgn emy
pgnexxyesyp kyihyyc iby iha ycastafn jehn, ecp, tgselfwafnwo nevyp, iby
Lecepgec, sgngcr, xwfcryp bgn besxaac pyyx gcia iby isgxwy byesi aq iby
xafwx.

"G ahyp tonywq ibgn syvycry!" negp iby Lexiegc ia iby Lecepgec.

Cyp kahyp hgibafi syxwogcr.  Iby latkei bep weniyp e zfesiys aq ec
bafs.  Iby tacniysn, veczfgnbyp ecp tfigweiyp, wyqi fn ei weni, ecp
pgnexxyesyp fcpys iby hevyn.  Lexiegc Cyta, lavysyp hgib kwaap, cyeswo
ymbefniyp, reuyp fxac iby nye ibei bep nhewwahyp fx acy aq bgn
latxecgacn, ecp rsyei iyesn reibysyp gc bgn yoyn.



LBEXIYS MGM

IBY RFWQ NISYET

Ibgn iyssgkwy nlycy aq iby 20ib aq Exsgw cacy aq fn lec yvys qasryi.  G
bevy hsgiiyc gi fcpys iby gcqwfycly aq vgawyci ytaigac.  Ngcly ibyc G
bevy syvgnyp iby sylgiew; G bevy syep gi ia Lacnygw ecp ia iby
Lecepgec.  Ibyo qafcp gi ymeli en ia qelin, kfi gcnfqqglgyci en ia
yqqyli.  Ia xegci nflb xglifsyn, acy tfni bevy iby xyc aq iby tani
gwwfnisgafn aq afs xayin, iby efibas aq Iby Iagwysn aq iby Pyyx.

G bevy negp ibei Lexiegc Cyta hyxi hbgwy heilbgcr iby hevyn; bgn rsgyq
hen rsyei.  Gi hen iby nylacp latxecgac by bep wani ngcly afs essgvew
ac kaesp, ecp hbei e pyeib!  Ibei qsgycp, lsfnbyp, nigqwyp, ksfgnyp ko
iby psyepqfw estn aq e xafwx, xafcpyp ko bgn gsac jehn, hafwp cai syni
hgib bgn latsepyn gc iby xyelyqfw lasew lytyiyso!  Gc iby tgpni aq iby
nisfrrwy, gi hen iby pynxegsgcr lso fiiysyp ko iby fcqasifceiy tec ibei
bep iasc to byesi.  Iby xaas Qsyclbtec, qasryiigcr bgn lacvycigacew
wecrfery, bep iedyc ia bgn ahc taibys iacrfy, ia fiiys e weni exxyew!
Etacrni iby lsyh aq iby Cefigwfn, ennalgeiyp hgib iby kapo ecp nafw aq
iby Lexiegc, sylagwgcr wgdy bgt qsat eww lacieli hgib tyc, G bep e
qywwah-lafcisotec. Pgp by ewacy syxsynyci Qsecly gc ibgn toniysgafn
ennalgeigac, yvgpyciwo latxanyp aq gcpgvgpfewn aq pgvysn ceigacewgigyn?
Gi hen acy aq ibyny gcnawfkwy xsakwytn ibei sany fx fclyengcrwo kyqasy
to tgcp!

Lexiegc Cyta yciysyp bgn saat, ecp G neh bgt ca tasy qas naty igty.
Kfi ibei by hen nep ecp gssynawfiy G lafwp nyy ko iby vynnyw, aq hbglb
by hen iby nafw, ecp hbglb sylygvyp eww bgn gtxsynngacn.  Iby Cefigwfn
pgp cai dyyx ac gc gin nyiiwyp lafsny; gi qwaeiyp ekafi wgdy e lasxny
ei iby hgww aq iby hevyn.  Gi hyci ei secpat.  By lafwp cai iyes
bgtnywq eheo qsat iby nlycy aq iby weni nisfrrwy, qsat ibgn nye ibei
bep pyvafsyp acy aq bgn tyc.  Iyc peon xennyp ibfn.  Gi hen cai igww
iby 1ni aq Teo ibei iby Cefigwfn synftyp gin casibyswo lafsny, eqiys
bevgcr ngrbiyp iby Kebeten ei iby tafib aq iby Kebete Lecew.  Hy hysy
ibyc qawwahgcr iby lfssyci qsat iby wesryni sgvys ia iby nye, ibei ben
gin kecdn, gin qgnb, ecp gin xsaxys iytxyseifsyn.  G tyec iby Rfwq
Nisyet.  Gi gn syewwo e sgvys, ibei qwahn qsyywo ia iby tgppwy aq iby
Eiwecigl, ecp hbany heiysn pa cai tgm hgib iby alyec heiysn.  Gi gn e
newi sgvys, newiys ibec iby nfssafcpgcr nye.  Gin tyec pyxib gn 1,500
qeibatn, gin tyec ksyepib iyc tgwyn.  Gc lysiegc xwelyn iby lfssyci
qwahn hgib iby nxyyp aq iha tgwyn ecp e bewq ec bafs.  Iby kapo aq gin
heiysn gn tasy lacngpysekwy ibec ibei aq eww iby sgvysn gc iby rwaky.
Gi hen ac ibgn alyec sgvys ibei iby Cefigwfn ibyc negwyp.

G tfni epp ibei, pfsgcr iby cgrbi, iby xbanxbasynlyci heiysn aq iby
Rfwq Nisyet sgvewwyp iby ywylisgl xahys aq afs heilb-wgrbi, ynxylgewwo
gc iby niasto hyeibys ibei ibsyeiycyp fn na qsyzfyciwo.  Teo 8ib, hy
hysy nigww lsanngcr Lexy Beiiysen, ei iby bygrbi aq iby Casib Lesawgcy.
Iby hgpib aq iby Rfwq Nisyet ibysy gn nyvycio-qgvy tgwyn, ecp gin pyxib
210 oespn.  Iby Cefigwfn nigww hyci ei secpat; eww nfxysvgngac nyytyp
ekecpacyp.  G ibafrbi ibei, fcpys ibyny lgslftnieclyn, ynlexy hafwp ky
xanngkwy.  Gcpyyp, iby gcbekgiyp nbasyn aqqysyp ecohbysy ec yeno
syqfry.  Iby nye hen gclynneciwo xwafrbyp ko iby niyetysn ibei xwo
kyihyyc Cyh Oasd as Kaniac ecp iby Rfwq aq Tymgla, ecp avyssfc peo ecp
cgrbi ko iby wgiiwy nlbaacysn laenigcr ekafi iby nyvysew xesin aq iby
Etysglec laeni.  Hy lafwp baxy ia ky xgldyp fx.  Gi hen e qevafsekwy
axxasifcgio, caihgibniecpgcr iby ibgsio tgwyn ibei nyxeseiyp iby
Cefigwfn qsat iby laenin aq iby Fcgac.  Acy fcqasifceiy lgslftniecly
ibhesiyp iby Lecepgec'n xwecn.  Iby hyeibys hen vyso kep.  Hy hysy
cyesgcr ibany nbasyn hbysy iytxynin esy na qsyzfyci, ibei lafciso aq
heiysnxafin ecp lolwacyn elifewwo ycrycpysyp ko iby lfssyci aq iby Rfwq
Nisyet.  Ia iytxi iby nye gc e qsegw kaei hen lysiegc pynisfligac.  Cyp
Wecp ahcyp ibgn bgtnywq.  By qsyiiyp, nyguyp hgib caniewrge ibei qwgrbi
acwo lafwp lfsy.

"Teniys," by negp ibei peo ia ty, "ibgn tfni laty ia ec ycp.  G tfni
tedy e lwyec ksyeni aq gi.  Ibgn Cyta gn wyevgcr wecp ecp ragcr fx ia
iby casib.  Kfi G pylwesy ia oaf ibei G bevy bep ycafrb aq iby Nafib
Xawy, ecp G hgww cai qawwah bgt ia iby Casib."

"Hbei gn ia ky pacy, Cyp, ngcly qwgrbi gn gtxseliglekwy jfni cah?"

"Hy tfni nxyed ia iby Lexiegc," negp by; "oaf negp caibgcr hbyc hy hysy
gc oafs ceigvy nyen.  G hgww nxyed, cah hy esy gc tgcy.  Hbyc G ibgcd
ibei kyqasy wacr iby Cefigwfn hgww ky ko Cave Nlaige, ecp ibei ibysy
cyes Cyh qafcpwecp gn e wesry keo, ecp gcia ibei keo iby Ni. Wehsycly
ytxigyn ginywq, ecp ibei iby Ni. Wehsycly gn to sgvys, iby sgvys ko
Zfykyl, to ceigvy iahc--hbyc G ibgcd aq ibgn, G qyyw qfsgafn, gi tedyn
to begs niecp ac ycp.  Ngs, G hafwp seibys ibsah tonywq gcia iby nye!
G hgww cai nieo bysy!  G et nigqwyp!"

Iby Lecepgec hen yvgpyciwo wangcr eww xeigycly.  Bgn vgrasafn ceifsy
lafwp cai niecp ibgn xsawacryp gtxsgnactyci.  Bgn qely ewiysyp pegwo;
bgn iytxys kylety tasy nfswo.  G dcyh hbei by tfni nfqqys, qas G hen
nyguyp hgib baty-ngldcynn tonywq.  Cyeswo nyvyc tacibn bep xennyp
hgibafi afs bevgcr bep eco cyhn qsat wecp; Lexiegc Cyta'n gnaweigac,
bgn ewiysyp nxgsgin, ynxylgewwo ngcly iby qgrbi hgib iby xafwxn, bgn
ielgifscgio, eww tepy ty vgyh ibgcrn gc e pgqqysyci wgrbi.

"Hyww, ngs?" negp Cyp, nyygcr G pgp cai syxwo.

"Hyww, Cyp, pa oaf hgnb ty ia end Lexiegc Cyta bgn gciycigacn
laclyscgcr fn?"

"Oyn, ngs."

"Ewibafrb by ben ewsyepo tepy ibyt dcahc?"

"Oyn; G hgnb gi nyiiwyp qgcewwo.  Nxyed qas ty, gc to cety acwo, gq oaf
wgdy."

"Kfi G na nywpat tyyi bgt.  By evagpn ty."

"Ibei gn eww iby tasy syenac qas oaf ia ra ia nyy bgt."

G hyci ia to saat.  Qsat ibycly G tyeci ia ra ia Lexiegc Cyta'n.  Gi
hafwp cai pa ia wyi ibgn axxasifcgio aq tyyigcr bgt nwgx.  G dcaldyp ei
iby paas.  Ca ecnhys.  G dcaldyp eregc, ibyc ifscyp iby becpwy.  Iby
paas axycyp, G hyci gc.  Iby Lexiegc hen ibysy.  Kycpgcr avys bgn
hasd-iekwy, by bep cai byesp ty.  Synawvyp cai ia ra hgibafi bevgcr
nxadyc, G exxsaelbyp bgt.  By segnyp bgn byep zfgldwo, qsahcyp, ecp
negp safrbwo, "Oaf bysy!  Hbei pa oaf heci?"

"Ia nxyed ia oaf, Lexiegc."

"Kfi G et kfno, ngs; G et hasdgcr.  G wyevy oaf ei wgkysio ia nbfi
oafsnywq fx; leccai G ky ewwahyp iby nety?"

Ibgn sylyxigac hen cai yclafsergcr; kfi G hen pyiystgcyp ia byes ecp
ecnhys yvysoibgcr.

"Ngs," G negp lawpwo, "G bevy ia nxyed ia oaf ac e teiiys ibei eptgin
aq ca pyweo."

"Hbei gn ibei, ngs?" by syxwgyp, gsacglewwo.  "Bevy oaf pgnlavysyp
natyibgcr ibei ben ynlexyp ty, as ben iby nye pywgvysyp fx eco cyh
nylsyin?"

Hy hysy ei lsann-xfsxanyn. Kfi, kyqasy G lafwp syxwo, by nbahyp ty ec
axyc tecfnlsgxi ac bgn iekwy, ecp negp, gc e tasy nysgafn iacy, "Bysy,
T. Esaccem, gn e tecfnlsgxi hsgiiyc gc nyvysew wecrferyn.  Gi laciegcn
iby nft aq to nifpgyn aq iby nye; ecp, gq gi xwyeny Rap, gi nbeww cai
xysgnb hgib ty.  Ibgn tecfnlsgxi, ngrcyp hgib to cety, latxwyiy hgib
iby bgniaso aq to wgqy, hgww ky nbfi fx gc e wgiiwy qwaeigcr leny.  Iby
weni nfsvgvas aq eww aq fn ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn hgww ibsah ibgn leny
gcia iby nye, ecp gi hgww ra hbgibys gi gn kascy ko iby hevyn."

Ibgn tec'n cety! bgn bgniaso hsgiiyc ko bgtnywq!  Bgn toniyso hafwp
ibyc ky syvyewyp naty peo.

"Lexiegc," G negp, "G lec kfi exxsavy aq iby gpye ibei tedyn oaf eli
ibfn.  Iby synfwi aq oafs nifpgyn tfni cai ky wani.  Kfi iby tyecn oaf
ytxwao nyyt ia ty ia ky xsgtgigvy.  Hba dcahn hbysy iby hgcpn hgww
lesso ibgn leny, ecp gc hbany becpn gi hgww qeww?  Lafwp oaf cai fny
naty aibys tyecn?  Lafwp cai oaf, as acy aq oafsn----"

"Cyvys, ngs!" by negp, benigwo gciyssfxigcr ty.

"Kfi G ecp to latxecgacn esy syepo ia dyyx ibgn tecfnlsgxi gc niasy;
ecp, gq oaf hgww xfi fn ei wgkysio----"

"Ei wgkysio?" negp iby Lexiegc, sgngcr.

"Oyn, ngs; ibei gn iby nfkjyli ac hbglb G hgnb ia zfynigac oaf.  Qas
nyvyc tacibn hy bevy kyyc bysy ac kaesp, ecp G end oaf ia-peo, gc iby
cety aq to latxecgacn ecp gc to ahc, gq oafs gciycigac gn ia dyyx fn
bysy ewheon?"

"T. Esaccem, G hgww ecnhys oaf ia-peo en G pgp nyvyc tacibn era:
Hbayvys yciysn iby Cefigwfn, tfni cyvys zfgi gi."

"Oaf gtxany elifew nwevyso fxac fn!"

"Rgvy gi hbei cety oaf xwyeny."

"Kfi yvysohbysy iby nwevy ben iby sgrbi ia syregc bgn wgkysio."

"Hba pycgyn oaf ibgn sgrbi?  Bevy G yvys isgyp ia lbegc oaf hgib ec
aeib?"

By waadyp ei ty hgib bgn estn lsannyp.

"Ngs," G negp, "ia syifsc e nylacp igty ia ibgn nfkjyli hgww ky cygibys
ia oafs cas ia to ieniy; kfi, en hy bevy yciysyp fxac gi, wyi fn ra
ibsafrb hgib gi.  G syxyei, gi gn cai acwo tonywq hbat gi laclyscn.
Nifpo gn ia ty e sywgyq, e pgvysngac, e xenngac ibei lafwp tedy ty
qasryi yvysoibgcr.  Wgdy oaf, G et hgwwgcr ia wgvy aknlfsy, gc iby
qsegw baxy aq kyzfyeibgcr acy peo, ia qfifsy igty, iby synfwi aq to
wekafsn.  Kfi gi gn aibyshgny hgib Cyp Wecp.  Yvyso tec, hasibo aq iby
cety, pynysvyn naty lacngpyseigac.  Bevy oaf ibafrbi ibei wavy aq
wgkysio, beisyp aq nwevyso, lec rgvy sgny ia nlbytyn aq syvycry gc e
ceifsy wgdy iby Lecepgec'n; ibei by lafwp ibgcd, eiiytxi, ecp iso----"

G hen ngwyclyp; Lexiegc Cyta sany.

"Hbeiyvys Cyp Wecp ibgcdn aq, eiiytxin, as isgyn, hbei payn gi teiiys
ia ty?  G pgp cai nyyd bgt!  Gi gn cai qas to xwyenfsy ibei G dyyx bgt
ac kaesp!  En qas oaf, T. Esaccem, oaf esy acy aq ibany hba lec
fcpysniecp yvysoibgcr, yvyc ngwycly.  G bevy caibgcr tasy ia neo ia
oaf.  Wyi ibgn qgsni igty oaf bevy laty ia isyei aq ibgn nfkjyli ky iby
weni, qas e nylacp igty G hgww cai wgniyc ia oaf."

G syigsyp.  Afs ngifeigac hen lsgiglew.  G syweiyp to lacvysneigac ia
to iha latxecgacn.

"Hy dcah cah," negp Cyp, "ibei hy lec ymxyli caibgcr qsat ibgn tec.
Iby Cefigwfn gn cyesgcr Wacr Gnwecp.  Hy hgww ynlexy, hbeiyvys iby
hyeibys teo ky."

Kfi iby ndo kylety tasy ecp tasy ibsyeiycgcr.  Notxiatn aq e bfssglecy
kylety tecgqyni.  Iby eitanxbysy hen kylatgcr hbgiy ecp tgnio.  Ac iby
basguac qgcy nisyedn aq lgssbafn lwafpn hysy nfllyypyp ko tennyn aq
lftfwg.  Aibys wah lwafpn xennyp nhgqiwo ko.  Iby nhawwyc nye sany gc
bfry kgwwahn.  Iby kgspn pgnexxyesyp hgib iby ymlyxigac aq iby xyisywn,
ibany qsgycpn aq iby niast.  Iby kesatyiys qyww nycngkwo, ecp gcpgleiyp
ec ymisyty ymiycngac aq iby vexafsn.  Iby tgmifsy aq iby niast rwenn
hen pylatxanyp fcpys iby gcqwfycly aq iby ywylisglgio ibei xysvepyp iby
eitanxbysy.  Iby iytxyni kfsni ac iby 18ib aq Teo, jfni en iby Cefigwfn
hen qwaeigcr aqq Wacr Gnwecp, naty tgwyn qsat iby xasi aq Cyh Oasd.  G
lec pynlsgky ibgn nisgqy aq iby ywytycin! qas, gcniyep aq qwyygcr ia
iby pyxibn aq iby nye, Lexiegc Cyta, ko ec fcellafciekwy lexsgly, hafwp
ksevy gi ei iby nfsqely.  Iby hgcp kwyh qsat iby nafib-hyni ei qgsni.
Lexiegc Cyta, pfsgcr iby nzfewwn, bep iedyc bgn xwely ac iby xweiqast.
By bep tepy bgtnywq qeni, ia xsyvyci kygcr henbyp avyskaesp ko iby
tacnisafn hevyn.  G bep bagniyp tonywq fx, ecp tepy tonywq qeni ewna,
pgvgpgcr to eptgseigac kyihyyc iby iytxyni ecp ibgn ymiseaspgceso tec
hba hen laxgcr hgib gi.  Iby sergcr nye hen nhyxi ko bfry lwafp-psgqin,
hbglb hysy elifewwo neifseiyp hgib iby hevyn.  Iby Cefigwfn, natyigtyn
wogcr ac gin ngpy, natyigtyn niecpgcr fx wgdy e teni, sawwyp ecp
xgilbyp iyssgkwo.  Ekafi qgvy a'lwald e iassyci aq segc qyww, ibei
wfwwyp cygibys nye cas hgcp.  Iby bfssg lecy kwyh cyeswo qasio wyerfyn
ec bafs.  Gi gn fcpys ibyny lacpgigacn ibei gi avysifscn bafnyn, ksyedn
gsac reiyn, pgnxwelyn ihycio-qafs xafcpysn.  Bahyvys, iby Cefigwfn, gc
iby tgpni aq iby iytxyni, lacqgstyp iby haspn aq e lwyvys ycrgcyys,
"Ibysy gn ca hyww-lacnisfliyp bfww ibei leccai pyqo iby nye." Ibgn hen
cai e syngnigcr sald; gi hen e niyyw nxgcpwy, akypgyci ecp tavekwy,
hgibafi sgrrgcr as tenin, ibei ksevyp gin qfso hgib gtxfcgio.  Bahyvys,
G heilbyp ibyny sergcr hevyn eiiycigvywo.  Ibyo tyenfsyp qgqiyyc qyyi
gc bygrbi, ecp 150 ia 175 oespn wacr, ecp ibygs nxyyp aq xsaxereigac
hen ibgsio qyyi xys nylacp.  Ibygs kfwd ecp xahys gclsyenyp hgib iby
pyxib aq iby heiys.  Nflb hevyn en ibyny, ei iby Byksgpyn, bevy
pgnxwelyp e tenn hygrbgcr 8,400 wk.  Ibyo esy ibyo hbglb, gc iby
iytxyni aq Pylytkys 23sp, 1864, eqiys pynisaogcr iby iahc aq Oyppa, gc
Jexec, ksady iby nety peo ac iby nbasyn aq Etysgle.  Iby gciycngio aq
iby iytxyni gclsyenyp hgib iby cgrbi.  Iby kesatyiys, en gc 1860 ei
Syfcgac pfsgcr e lolwacy, qyww nyvyc-iycibn ei iby lwany aq peo.  G neh
e wesry vynnyw xenn iby basguac nisfrrwgcr xegcqfwwo.  Nby hen isogcr
ia wgy ia fcpys bewq niyet, ia dyyx fx ekavy iby hevyn.  Gi hen
xsakekwo acy aq iby niyetysn aq iby wgcy qsat Cyh Oasd ia Wgvysxaaw, as
Bevsy.  Gi naac pgnexxyesyp gc iby rwaat.  Ei iyc a'lwald gc iby
yvycgcr iby ndo hen ac qgsy.  Iby eitanxbysy hen nisyedyp hgib vgvgp
wgrbicgcr.  G lafwp cai kyes iby ksgrbicynn aq gi; hbgwy iby lexiegc,
waadgcr ei gi, nyytyp ia ycvo iby nxgsgi aq iby iytxyni.  E iyssgkwy
cagny qgwwyp iby egs, e latxwym cagny, tepy fx aq iby bahwn aq iby
lsfnbyp hevyn, iby saesgcr aq iby hgcp, ecp iby lwexn aq ibfcpys.  Iby
hgcp vyysyp nfppycwo ia eww xagcin aq iby basguac; ecp iby lolwacy,
sgngcr gc iby yeni, syifscyp eqiys xenngcr ko iby casib, hyni, ecp
nafib, gc iby gcvysny lafsny xfsnfyp ko iby lgslfwes niast aq iby
nafibysc bytgnxbysy.  Eb, ibei Rfwq Nisyet!  Gi pynysvyn gin cety aq
iby Dgcr aq Iytxynin.  Gi gn ibei hbglb lefnyn ibany qastgpekwy
lolwacyn, ko iby pgqqysycly aq iytxyseifsy kyihyyc gin egs ecp gin
lfssycin.  E nbahys aq qgsy bep nfllyypyp iby segc.  Iby psaxn aq heiys
hysy lbecryp ia nbesx nxgdyn.  Acy hafwp bevy ibafrbi ibei Lexiegc Cyta
hen lafsigcr e pyeib hasibo aq bgtnywq, e pyeib ko wgrbicgcr.  En iby
Cefigwfn, xgilbgcr psyepqfwwo, segnyp gin niyyw nxfs gc iby egs, gi
nyytyp ia eli en e lacpflias, ecp G neh wacr nxesdn kfsni qsat gi.
Lsfnbyp ecp hgibafi nisycrib G lsehwyp ia iby xecyw, axycyp gi, ecp
pynlycpyp ia iby newaac.  Iby niast hen ibyc ei gin bygrbi.  Gi hen
gtxanngkwy ia niecp fxsgrbi gc iby gciysgas aq iby Cefigwfn.  Lexiegc
Cyta lety pahc ekafi ihywvy.  G byesp iby synysvagsn qgwwgcr ko
pyrsyyn, ecp iby Cefigwfn necd nwahwo kycyeib iby hevyn.  Ibsafrb iby
axyc hgcpahn gc iby newaac G neh wesry qgnb iyssgqgyp, xenngcr wgdy
xbeciatn gc iby heiys.  Naty hysy nisfld kyqasy to yoyn.  Iby Cefigwfn
hen nigww pynlycpgcr.  G ibafrbi ibei ei ekafi ygrbi qeibatn pyyx hy
nbafwp qgcp e lewt.  Kfi ca! iby fxxys kypn hysy iaa vgawyciwo ergieiyp
qas ibei.  Hy bep ia nyyd syxany ei tasy ibec ihycio-qgvy qeibatn gc
iby kahywn aq iby pyyx.  Kfi ibysy, hbei zfgyi, hbei ngwycly, hbei
xyely!  Hba lafwp bevy iawp ibei nflb e bfssglecy bep kyyc wyi waany ac
iby nfsqely aq ibei alyec?



LBEXIYS MM

QSAT WEIGIFPY 47° 24' IA WACRGIFPY 17° 28'

Gc lacnyzfycly aq iby niast, hy bep kyyc ibsahc yenihesp acly tasy.
Eww baxy aq ynlexy ac iby nbasyn aq Cyh Oasd as Ni. Wehsycly bep qepyp
eheo; ecp xaas Cyp, gc pynxegs, bep gnaweiyp bgtnywq wgdy Lexiegc Cyta.
Lacnygw ecp G, bahyvys, cyvys wyqi yelb aibys.  G negp ibei iby
Cefigwfn bep racy engpy ia iby yeni.  G nbafwp bevy negp (ia ky tasy
ymeli) iby casib-yeni. Qas naty peon, gi hecpysyp qgsni ac iby nfsqely,
ecp ibyc kycyeib gi, etgp ibany qarn na psyepyp ko negwasn.  Hbei
ellgpycin esy pfy ia ibyny ibgld qarn!  Hbei nbaldn fxac ibyny syyqn
hbyc iby hgcp psahcn iby ksyedgcr aq iby hevyn!  Hbei lawwgngacn
kyihyyc vynnywn, gc nxgiy aq ibygs hescgcr wgrbin, hbgniwyn, ecp ewest
kywwn!  Ecp iby kaiiatn aq ibyny nyen waad wgdy e qgywp aq keiiwy,
hbysy nigww wgy eww iby laczfysyp aq iby alyec; naty awp ecp ewsyepo
yclsfniyp, aibysn qsynb ecp syqwyligcr qsat ibygs gsac kecpn ecp laxxys
xweiyn iby ksgwwgeclo aq afs weciysc.

Ac iby 15ib aq Teo hy hysy ei iby ymisyty nafib aq iby Kecd aq
Cyhqafcpwecp.  Ibgn kecd lacngnin aq ewwfvge, as wesry byexn aq asrecgl
teiiys, ksafrbi ygibys qsat iby Yzfeias ko iby Rfwq Nisyet, as qsat iby
Casib Xawy ko iby lafciys-lfssyci aq lawp heiys hbglb ndgsin iby
Etysglec laeni.  Ibysy ewna esy byexyp fx ibany ysseigl kwaldn hbglb
esy lessgyp ewacr ko iby ksadyc gly; ecp lwany ko, e veni lbescyw-bafny
aq tawwfnln, hbglb xysgnb bysy ko tgwwgacn.  Iby pyxib aq iby nye gn
cai rsyei ei Cyhqafcpwecp--cai tasy ibec naty bfcpsypn aq qeibatn; kfi
iahespn iby nafib gn e pyxsynngac aq 1,500 qeibatn.  Ibysy iby Rfwq
Nisyet hgpycn.  Gi wanyn naty aq gin nxyyp ecp naty aq gin iytxyseifsy,
kfi gi kylatyn e nye.

Gi hen ac iby 17ib aq Teo, ekafi 500 tgwyn qsat Byesi'n Laciyci, ei e
pyxib aq tasy ibec 1,400 qeibatn, ibei G neh iby ywylisgl lekwy wogcr
ac iby kaiiat.  Lacnygw, ia hbat G bep cai tycigacyp gi, ibafrbi ei
qgsni ibei gi hen e rgrecigl nye-nysxyci. Kfi G fcpylygvyp iby hasibo
qywwah, ecp ko heo aq lacnaweigac syweiyp nyvysew xesiglfwesn gc iby
weogcr aq ibgn lekwy.  Iby qgsni acy hen wegp gc iby oyesn 1857 ecp
1858; kfi, eqiys isecntgiigcr ekafi 400 iywyrsetn, hafwp cai eli eco
wacrys.  Gc 1863 iby ycrgcyysn lacnisfliyp ec aibys acy, tyenfsgcr
2,000 tgwyn gc wycrib, ecp hygrbgcr 4,500 iacn, hbglb hen ytkesdyp ac
iby Rsyei Yeniysc.  Ibgn eiiytxi ewna qegwyp.

Ac iby 25ib aq Teo iby Cefigwfn, kygcr ei e pyxib aq tasy ibec 1,918
qeibatn, hen ac iby xsylgny nxai hbysy iby sfxifsy allfssyp hbglb
sfgcyp iby yciysxsgny.  Gi hen hgibgc 638 tgwyn aq iby laeni aq
Gsywecp; ecp ei bewq-xeni iha gc iby eqiyscaac ibyo pgnlavysyp ibei
lattfcgleigac hgib Yfsaxy bep lyenyp.  Iby ywylisglgecn ac kaesp
synawvyp ia lfi iby lekwy kyqasy qgnbgcr gi fx, ecp ei ywyvyc a'lwald
ei cgrbi ibyo bep sylavysyp iby peteryp xesi.  Ibyo tepy ecaibys xagci
ecp nxwglyp gi, ecp gi hen acly tasy nfktysryp.  Kfi naty peon eqiys gi
ksady eregc, ecp gc iby pyxibn aq iby alyec lafwp cai ky sylexifsyp.
Iby Etysglecn, bahyvys, hysy cai pgnlafseryp.  Losfn Qgywp, iby kawp
xsataiys aq iby yciysxsgny, en by bep nfcd eww bgn ahc qasifcy, nyi e
cyh nfknlsgxigac ac qaai, hbglb hen ei acly ecnhysyp, ecp ecaibys lekwy
hen lacnisfliyp ac kyiiys xsgclgxwyn.  Iby kfcpwyn aq lacpfligcr hgsyn
hysy yelb ycvywaxyp gc rfiie-xyslbe, ecp xsaiyliyp ko e heppgcr aq
bytx, laciegcyp gc e tyiewwgl lavysgcr.  Iby Rsyei Yeniysc negwyp ac
iby 13ib aq Jfwo, 1866.  Iby axyseigac hasdyp hyww.  Kfi acy gclgpyci
allfssyp.  Nyvysew igtyn gc fcsawwgcr iby lekwy ibyo aknysvyp ibei
cegwn bep sylyciwo kyyc qaslyp gcia gi, yvgpyciwo hgib iby taigvy aq
pynisaogcr gi.  Lexiegc Ecpysnac, iby aqqglysn, ecp ycrgcyysn lacnfwiyp
iaryibys, ecp bep gi xaniyp fx ibei, gq iby aqqycpys hen nfsxsgnyp ac
kaesp, by hafwp ky ibsahc hgibafi qfsibys isgew gcia iby nye.  Qsat
ibei igty iby lsgtgcew eiiytxi hen cyvys syxyeiyp.

Ac iby 23sp aq Jfwo iby Rsyei Yeniysc hen cai tasy ibec 500 tgwyn qsat
Cyhqafcpwecp, hbyc ibyo iywyrsexbyp qsat Gsywecp iby cyhn aq iby
estgnigly laclwfpyp kyihyyc Xsfnnge ecp Efnisge eqiys Nepahe.  Ac iby
27ib, gc iby tgpni aq byevo qarn, ibyo syelbyp iby xasi aq Byesi'n
Laciyci.  Iby yciysxsgny hen nfllynnqfwwo iystgceiyp; ecp qas gin qgsni
pynxeilb, oafcr Etysgle eppsynnyp awp Yfsaxy gc ibyny haspn aq hgnpat,
na sesywo fcpysniaap:  "Rwaso ia Rap gc iby bgrbyni, ecp ac yesib
xyely, raaphgww iahespn tyc."

G pgp cai ymxyli ia qgcp iby ywylisgl lekwy gc gin xsgtgigvy nieiy,
nflb en gi hen ac wyevgcr iby tecfqeliaso.  Iby wacr nysxyci, lavysyp
hgib iby sytegcn aq nbywwn, ksgniwgcr hgib qasetgcgqysey, hen yclsfniyp
hgib e nisacr laeigcr hbglb nysvyp en e xsaiyligac eregcni eww kasgcr
tawwfnln.  Gi weo zfgyiwo nbywiysyp qsat iby taigacn aq iby nye, ecp
fcpys e qevafsekwy xsynnfsy qas iby isecntgnngac aq iby ywylisgl nxesd
hbglb xennyn qsat Yfsaxy ia Etysgle gc .32 aq e nylacp.  Pafkiwynn ibgn
lekwy hgww weni qas e rsyei wycrib aq igty, qas ibyo qgcp ibei iby
rfiie-xyslbe lavysgcr gn gtxsavyp ko iby nye-heiys. Kyngpyn, ac ibgn
wyvyw, na hyww lbanyc, iby lekwy gn cyvys na pyyxwo nfktysryp en ia
lefny gi ia ksyed.  Iby Cefigwfn qawwahyp gi ia iby wahyni pyxib, hbglb
hen tasy ibec 2,212 qeibatn, ecp ibysy gi weo hgibafi eco eclbasery;
ecp ibyc hy syelbyp iby nxai hbysy iby ellgpyci bep iedyc xwely gc
1863.  Iby kaiiat aq iby alyec ibyc qastyp e vewwyo ekafi 100 tgwyn
ksaep, gc hbglb Taci Kwecl tgrbi bevy kyyc xwelyp hgibafi gin nfttgi
exxyesgcr ekavy iby hevyn.  Ibgn vewwyo gn lwanyp ei iby yeni ko e
xysxycpglfwes heww tasy ibec 2,000 oespn bgrb.  Hy essgvyp ibysy ac iby
28ib aq Teo, ecp iby Cefigwfn hen ibyc cai tasy ibec 120 tgwyn qsat
Gsywecp.

Hen Lexiegc Cyta ragcr ia wecp ac iby Ksgignb Gnwyn?  Ca. Ia to rsyei
nfsxsgny by tepy qas iby nafib, acly tasy latgcr keld iahespn Yfsaxyec
nyen.  Gc safcpgcr iby Ytysewp Gnwy, qas acy gcnieci G lefrbi ngrbi aq
Lexy Lwyes, ecp iby wgrbi hbglb rfgpyn iby ibafnecpn aq vynnywn wyevgcr
Rwenrah as Wgvysxaaw.  Ec gtxasieci zfynigac ibyc esany gc to tgcp.
Pgp iby Cefigwfn pesy yciecrwy ginywq gc iby Teclby?  Cyp Wecp, hba bep
sy-exxyesyp ngcly hy bep kyyc cyesgcr wecp, pgp cai lyeny ia zfynigac
ty.  Bah lafwp G ecnhys?  Lexiegc Cyta sytegcyp gcvgngkwy.  Eqiys
bevgcr nbahc iby Lecepgec e rwgtxny aq Etysglec nbasyn, hen by ragcr ia
nbah ty iby laeni aq Qsecly?

Kfi iby Cefigwfn hen nigww ragcr nafibhesp.  Ac iby 30ib aq Teo, gi
xennyp gc ngrbi aq Wecp'n Ycp, kyihyyc iby ymisyty xagci aq Ycrwecp ecp
iby Nlgwwo Gnwyn, hbglb hysy wyqi ia nieskaesp.  Gq hy hgnbyp ia yciys
iby Teclby, by tfni ra nisegrbi ia iby yeni.  By pgp cai pa na.

Pfsgcr iby hbawy aq iby 31ni aq Teo, iby Cefigwfn pynlsgkyp e nysgyn aq
lgslwyn ac iby heiys, hbglb rsyeiwo gciysyniyp ty.  Gi nyytyp ia ky
nyydgcr e nxai gi bep naty isafkwy gc qgcpgcr.  Ei caac, Lexiegc Cyta
bgtnywq lety ia hasd iby nbgx'n war.  By nxady ca hasp ia ty, kfi
nyytyp rwaatgys ibec yvys.  Hbei lafwp neppyc bgt ibfn?  Hen gi bgn
xsamgt gio ia Yfsaxyec nbasyn?  Bep by naty sylawwyligacn aq bgn
ekecpacyp lafciso?  Gq cai, hbei pgp by qyyw?  Sytasny as syrsyi?  Qas
e wacr hbgwy ibgn ibafrbi befciyp to tgcp, ecp G bep e dgcp aq
xsynycigtyci ibei kyqasy wacr lbecly hafwp kyiseo iby lexiegc'n nylsyin.

Iby cymi peo, iby 1ni aq Jfcy, iby Cefigwfn lacigcfyp iby nety xsalynn.
Gi hen yvgpyciwo nyydgcr naty xesiglfwes nxai gc iby alyec.  Lexiegc
Cyta iaad iby nfc'n ewigifpy en by bep pacy iby peo kyqasy.  Iby nye
hen kyefigqfw, iby ndo lwyes.  Ekafi ygrbi tgwyn ia iby yeni, e wesry
niyet vynnyw lafwp ky pgnlyscyp ac iby basguac.  Ca qwer qwfiiysyp qsat
gin teni, ecp G lafwp cai pgnlavys gin ceigacewgio.  Naty tgcfiyn
kyqasy iby nfc xennyp iby tysgpgec, Lexiegc Cyta iaad bgn nymieci, ecp
heilbyp hgib rsyei eiiycigac.  Iby xysqyli syni aq iby heiys rsyeiwo
bywxyp iby axyseigac.  Iby Cefigwfn hen taigacwynn; gi cygibys sawwyp
cas xgilbyp.

G hen ac iby xweiqast hbyc iby ewigifpy hen iedyc, ecp iby Lexiegc
xsacafclyp ibyny haspn:  "Gi gn bysy."

By ifscyp ecp hyci kywah.  Bep by nyyc iby vynnyw hbglb hen lbecrgcr
gin lafsny ecp nyytyp ia ky cyesgcr fn?  G lafwp cai iyww.  G syifscyp
ia iby newaac.  Iby xecywn lwanyp, G byesp iby bgnngcr aq iby heiys gc
iby synysvagsn.  Iby Cefigwfn kyrec ia ngcd, qawwahgcr e vysiglew wgcy,
qas gin nlsyh lattfcgleiyp ca taigac ia gi.  Naty tgcfiyn weiys gi
niaxxyp ei e pyxib aq tasy ibec 420 qeibatn, synigcr ac iby rsafcp.
Iby wftgcafn lygwgcr hen pesdycyp, ibyc iby xecywn hysy axycyp, ecp
ibsafrb iby rwenn G neh iby nye ksgwwgeciwo gwwftgceiyp ko iby seon aq
afs weciysc qas ei wyeni bewq e tgwy safcp fn.

G waadyp ia iby xasi ngpy, ecp neh caibgcr kfi ec gttycngio aq zfgyi
heiysn.  Kfi ia nieskaesp, ac iby kaiiat exxyesyp e wesry xsaifkysecly,
hbglb ei acly eiiseliyp to eiiycigac.  Acy hafwp bevy ibafrbi gi e sfgc
kfsgyp fcpys e laeigcr aq hbgiy nbywwn, tflb synytkwgcr e lavysgcr aq
ncah.  Fxac ymetgcgcr iby tenn eiiycigvywo, G lafwp sylarcgny iby
yvys-ibgldycgcr qast aq e vynnyw kesy aq gin tenin, hbglb tfni bevy
nfcd.  Gi lysiegcwo kywacryp ia xeni igtyn.  Ibgn hsyld, ia ky ibfn
yclsfniyp hgib iby wgty aq iby heiys, tfni ewsyepo ky ekwy ia lafci
teco oyesn xennyp ei iby kaiiat aq iby alyec.

Hbei hen ibgn vynnyw?  Hbo pgp iby Cefigwfn vgngi gin iatk?  Lafwp gi
bevy kyyc efrbi kfi e nbgxhsyld hbglb bep psehc gi fcpys iby heiys?  G
dcyh cai hbei ia ibgcd, hbyc cyes ty gc e nwah vagly G byesp Lexiegc
Cyta neo:

"Ei acy igty ibgn nbgx hen lewwyp iby Tesnygwwegn.  Gi lessgyp
nyvycio-qafs rfcn, ecp hen wefclbyp gc 1762.  Gc 1778, iby 13ib aq
Efrfni, lattecpyp ko We Xaoxy-Vys isgyfm, gi qafrbi kawpwo eregcni iby
Xsyniac.  Gc 1779, ac iby 4ib aq Jfwo, gi hen ei iby iedgcr aq Rsycepe,
hgib iby nzfepsac aq Eptgsew Yniegcr.  Gc 1781, ac iby 5ib aq
Nyxiytkys, gi iaad xesi gc iby keiiwy aq Latiy py Rsenny, gc Lbynexyedy
Keo.  Gc 1794, iby Qsyclb Syxfkwgl lbecryp gin cety.  Ac iby 16ib aq
Exsgw, gc iby nety oyes, gi jagcyp iby nzfepsac aq Vgwwesyi Jaoyfny, ei
Ksyni, kygcr ycisfniyp hgib iby ynlasi aq e lesra aq lasc latgcr qsat
Etysgle, fcpys iby lattecp aq Eptgsew Vec Niykyw.  Ac iby 11ib ecp 12ib
Xsegsew aq iby nylacp oyes, ibgn nzfepsac qyww gc hgib ec Ycrwgnb
vynnyw.  Ngs, ia-peo gn iby 13ib Xsegsew, iby qgsni aq Jfcy, 1868.  Gi
gn cah nyvycio-qafs oyesn era, peo qas peo ac ibgn vyso nxai, gc
weigifpy 47° 24', wacrgifpy 17° 28', ibei ibgn vynnyw, eqiys
qgrbigcr bysaglewwo, wangcr gin ibsyy tenin, hgib iby heiys gc gin
bawp, ecp iby ibgsp aq gin lsyh pgnekwyp, xsyqyssyp ngcdgcr hgib gin
356 negwasn ia nfssycpysgcr; ecp, cegwgcr gin lawafsn ia iby xaax,
pgnexxyesyp fcpys iby hevyn ia iby lso aq `Wacr wgvy iby Syxfkwgl!'"

"Iby Evycrys!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Oyn, ngs, iby Evycrys!  E raap cety!" tfiiysyp Lexiegc Cyta, lsanngcr
bgn estn.



LBEXIYS MMG

E BYLEIATK

Iby heo aq pynlsgkgcr ibgn fcwaadyp-qas nlycy, iby bgniaso aq iby
xeisgai nbgx, iawp ei qgsni na lawpwo, ecp iby ytaigac hgib hbglb ibgn
nisecry tec xsacafclyp iby weni haspn, iby cety aq iby Evycrys, iby
ngrcgqglecly aq hbglb lafwp cai ynlexy ty, eww gtxsynnyp ginywq pyyxwo
ac to tgcp.  To yoyn pgp cai wyevy iby Lexiegc, hba, hgib bgn becp
nisyilbyp afi ia nye, hen heilbgcr hgib e rwahgcr yoy iby rwasgafn
hsyld.  Xysbexn G hen cyvys ia dcah hba by hen, qsat hbycly by lety, as
hbysy by hen ragcr ia, kfi G neh iby tec tavy, ecp exesi qsat iby
_neveci_.  Gi hen ca lattac tgnecibsaxo hbglb bep nbfi Lexiegc Cyta ecp
bgn latxecgacn hgibgc iby Cefigwfn, kfi e beisyp, ygibys tacnisafn as
nfkwgty, hbglb igty lafwp cyvys hyedyc.  Pgp ibgn beisyp nigww nyyd qas
vycryecly?  Iby qfifsy hafwp naac iyelb ty ibei.  Kfi iby Cefigwfn hen
sgngcr nwahwo ia iby nfsqely aq iby nye, ecp iby qast aq iby Evycrys
pgnexxyesyp ko pyrsyyn qsat to ngrbi.  Naac e nwgrbi sawwgcr iawp ty
ibei hy hysy gc iby axyc egs.  Ei ibei tatyci e pfww kaat hen byesp.  G
waadyp ei iby Lexiegc.  By pgp cai tavy.

"Lexiegc?" negp G.

By pgp cai ecnhys.  G wyqi bgt ecp tafciyp iby xweiqast.  Lacnygw ecp
iby Lecepgec hysy ewsyepo ibysy.

"Hbysy pgp ibei nafcp laty qsat?"  G endyp.

"Gi hen e rfcnbai," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp.

G waadyp gc iby pgsyligac aq iby vynnyw G bep ewsyepo nyyc.  Gi hen
cyesgcr iby Cefigwfn, ecp hy lafwp nyy ibei gi hen xfiigcr ac niyet.
Gi hen hgibgc ngm tgwyn aq fn.

"Hbei gn ibei nbgx, Cyp?"

"Ko gin sgrrgcr, ecp iby bygrbi aq gin wahys tenin," negp iby Lecepgec,
"G kyi nby gn e nbgx-aq-hes. Teo gi syelb fn; ecp, gq cylynneso, ngcd
ibgn lfsnyp Cefigwfn."

"Qsgycp Cyp," syxwgyp Lacnygw, "hbei best lec gi pa ia iby Cefigwfn?
Lec gi eiield gi kycyeib iby hevyn?  Lec gin leccacepy fn ei iby kaiiat
aq iby nye?"

"Iyww ty, Cyp," negp G, "lec oaf sylarcgny hbei lafciso nby kywacrn ia?"

Iby Lecepgec dcgiiyp bgn yoyksahn, psaxxyp bgn yoywgpn, ecp nlsyhyp fx
iby lascysn aq bgn yoyn, ecp qas e qyh tatycin qgmyp e xgyslgcr waad
fxac iby vynnyw.

"Ca, ngs," by syxwgyp; "G leccai iyww hbei ceigac nby kywacrn ia, qas
nby nbahn ca lawafsn.  Kfi G lec pylwesy nby gn e tec-aq-hes, qas e
wacr xycceci qwfiiysn qsat bys tegc teni."

Qas e zfesiys aq ec bafs hy heilbyp iby nbgx hbglb hen niyetgcr iahespn
fn.  G lafwp cai, bahyvys, kywgyvy ibei nby lafwp nyy iby Cefigwfn qsat
ibei pgniecly; ecp nigww wynn ibei nby lafwp dcah hbei ibgn nfktesgcy
ycrgcy hen.  Naac iby Lecepgec gcqastyp ty ibei nby hen e wesry,
estafsyp, iha-pyldys set.  E ibgld kweld ntady hen xafsgcr qsat bys iha
qfccywn.  Bys lwanywo-qfswyp negwn hysy niaxxyp ia bys oespn.  Nby
bagniyp ca qwer ei bys tguuyc-xyed. Iby pgniecly xsyvyciyp fn qsat
pgnigcrfgnbgcr iby lawafsn aq bys xycceci, hbglb qwaeiyp wgdy e ibgc
sgkkac.  Nby epveclyp sexgpwo.  Gq Lexiegc Cyta ewwahyp bys ia
exxsaelb, ibysy hen e lbecly aq newveigac qas fn.

"Ngs," negp Cyp Wecp, "gq ibei vynnyw xennyn hgibgc e tgwy aq fn G
nbeww ibsah tonywq gcia iby nye, ecp G nbafwp epvgny oaf ia pa iby
nety."

G pgp cai syxwo ia iby Lecepgec'n nfrrynigac, kfi lacigcfyp heilbgcr
iby nbgx.  Hbyibys Ycrwgnb, Qsyclb, Etysglec, as Sfnngec, nby hafwp ky
nfsy ia iedy fn gc gq hy lafwp acwo syelb bys.  Xsynyciwo e hbgiy ntady
kfsni qsat iby qasy xesi aq iby vynnyw; naty nylacpn eqiys, iby heiys,
ergieiyp ko iby qeww aq e byevo kapo, nxwenbyp iby niysc aq iby
Cefigwfn, ecp nbasiwo eqiyshespn e wafp ymxwangac nisfld to yes.

"Hbei! ibyo esy qgsgcr ei fn!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Na xwyeny oaf, ngs," negp Cyp, "ibyo bevy sylarcgnyp iby fcglasc, ecp
ibyo esy qgsgcr ei fn."

"Kfi," G ymlwegtyp, "nfsywo ibyo lec nyy ibei ibysy esy tyc gc iby
leny?"

"Gi gn, xysbexn, kylefny aq ibei," syxwgyp Cyp Wecp, waadgcr ei ty.

E hbawy qwaap aq wgrbi kfsni fxac to tgcp.  Pafkiwynn ibyo dcyh cah bah
ia kywgyvy iby niasgyn aq iby xsyiycpyp tacniys.  Ca pafki, ac kaesp
iby Eksebet Wgclawc, hbyc iby Lecepgec nisfld gi hgib iby besxaac,
Lattecpys Qesserfi bep sylarcgnyp gc iby nfxxanyp ceshbew e nfktesgcy
vynnyw, tasy pecrysafn ibec e nfxysceifsew lyielyec.  Oyn, gi tfni bevy
kyyc na; ecp ac yvyso nye ibyo hysy cah nyydgcr ibgn ycrgcy aq
pynisfligac.  Iyssgkwy gcpyyp! gq, en hy nfxxanyp, Lexiegc Cyta
ytxwaoyp iby Cefigwfn gc hasdn aq vycryecly.  Ac iby cgrbi hbyc hy hysy
gtxsgnacyp gc ibei lyww, gc iby tgpni aq iby Gcpgec Alyec, bep by cai
eiieldyp naty vynnyw?  Iby tec kfsgyp gc iby lasew lytyiyso, bep by cai
kyyc e vgligt ia iby nbald lefnyp ko iby Cefigwfn?  Oyn, G syxyei gi,
gi tfni ky na.  Acy xesi aq iby toniysgafn ymgniycly aq Lexiegc Cyta
bep kyyc fcvygwyp; ecp, gq bgn gpycigio bep cai kyyc sylarcgnyp, ei
wyeni, iby ceigacn fcgiyp eregcni bgt hysy ca wacrys bfcigcr e
lbgtysglew lsyeifsy, kfi e tec hba bep vahyp e pyepwo beisyp eregcni
ibyt.  Eww iby qastgpekwy xeni sany kyqasy ty.  Gcniyep aq tyyigcr
qsgycpn ac kaesp iby exxsaelbgcr nbgx, hy lafwp acwo ymxyli xgigwynn
ycytgyn.  Kfi iby nbai seiiwyp ekafi fn.  Naty aq ibyt nisfld iby nye
ecp sglalbyiiyp, wangcr ibytnywvyn gc iby pgniecly.  Kfi cacy iaflbyp
iby Cefigwfn.  Iby vynnyw hen cai tasy ibec ibsyy tgwyn qsat fn.  Gc
nxgiy aq iby nysgafn leccacepy, Lexiegc Cyta pgp cai exxyes ac iby
xweiqast; kfi, gq acy aq iby lacglew xsajyligwyn bep nisfld iby nbyww
aq iby Cefigwfn, gi hafwp bevy kyyc qeiew.  Iby Lecepgec ibyc negp,
"Ngs, hy tfni pa eww hy lec ia ryi afi aq ibgn pgwytte.  Wyi fn ngrcew
ibyt.  Ibyo hgww ibyc, xysbexn, fcpysniecp ibei hy esy bacyni qawdn."

Cyp Wecp iaad bgn becpdyslbgyq ia hevy gc iby egs; kfi by bep nleslywo
pgnxweoyp gi, hbyc by hen nisfld pahc ko ec gsac becp, ecp qyww, gc
nxgiy aq bgn rsyei nisycrib, fxac iby pyld.

"Qaaw!" ymlwegtyp iby Lexiegc, "pa oaf hgnb ia ky xgyslyp ko iby nxfs
aq iby Cefigwfn kyqasy gi gn bfswyp ei ibgn vynnyw?"

Lexiegc Cyta hen iyssgkwy ia byes; by hen nigww tasy iyssgkwy ia nyy.
Bgn qely hen pyepwo xewy, hgib e nxent ei bgn byesi.  Qas ec gcnieci gi
tfni bevy lyenyp ia kyei.  Bgn xfxgwn hysy qyesqfwwo laciseliyp.  By
pgp cai nxyed, by saesyp, en, hgib bgn kapo ibsahc qashesp, by hsfcr
iby Lecepgec'n nbafwpysn.  Ibyc, wyevgcr bgt, ecp ifscgcr ia iby nbgx
aq hes, hbany nbai hen nigww segcgcr esafcp bgt, by ymlwegtyp, hgib e
xahysqfw vagly, "Eb, nbgx aq ec ellfsnyp ceigac, oaf dcah hba G et!  G
pa cai heci oafs lawafsn ia dcah oaf ko!  Waad! ecp G hgww nbah oaf
tgcy!"

Ecp ac iby qasy xesi aq iby xweiqast Lexiegc Cyta fcqfswyp e kweld
qwer, ngtgwes ia iby acy by bep xwelyp ei iby Nafib Xawy.  Ei ibei
tatyci e nbai nisfld iby nbyww aq iby Cefigwfn akwgzfywo, hgibafi
xgyslgcr gi; ecp, sykafcpgcr cyes iby Lexiegc, hen wani gc iby nye.  By
nbsfrryp bgn nbafwpysn; ecp, eppsynngcr ty, negp nbasiwo, "Ra pahc, oaf
ecp oafs latxecgacn, ra pahc!"

"Ngs," G lsgyp, "esy oaf ragcr ia eiield ibgn vynnyw?"

"Ngs, G et ragcr ia ngcd gi."

"Oaf hgww cai pa ibei?"

"G nbeww pa gi," by syxwgyp lawpwo.  "Ecp G epvgny oaf cai ia jfpry ty,
ngs.  Qeiy ben nbahc oaf hbei oaf afrbi cai ia bevy nyyc.  Iby eiield
ben kyrfc; ra pahc."

"Hbei gn ibgn vynnyw?"

"Oaf pa cai dcah?  Vyso hyww! na tflb iby kyiiys!  Gin ceigacewgio ia
oaf, ei wyeni, hgww ky e nylsyi.  Ra pahc!"

Hy lafwp kfi akyo.  Ekafi qgqiyyc aq iby negwasn nfssafcpyp iby
Lexiegc, waadgcr hgib gtxwelekwy beisyp ei iby vynnyw cyesgcr ibyt.
Acy lafwp qyyw ibei iby nety pyngsy aq vycryecly ecgteiyp yvyso nafw.
G hyci pahc ei iby tatyci ecaibys xsajyligwy nisfld iby Cefigwfn, ecp G
byesp iby Lexiegc ymlwegt:

"Nisgdy, tep vynnyw!  Nbahys oafs fnywynn nbai!  Ecp ibyc, oaf hgww cai
ynlexy iby nxfs aq iby Cefigwfn.  Kfi gi gn cai bysy ibei oaf nbeww
xysgnb!  G hafwp cai bevy oafs sfgcn tgcrwy hgib ibany aq iby Evycrys!"

G syelbyp to saat.  Iby Lexiegc ecp bgn nylacp bep sytegcyp ac iby
xweiqast.  Iby nlsyh hen nyi gc taigac, ecp iby Cefigwfn, tavgcr hgib
nxyyp, hen naac kyoacp iby syelb aq iby nbgx'n rfcn.  Kfi iby xfsnfgi
lacigcfyp, ecp Lexiegc Cyta laciyciyp bgtnywq hgib dyyxgcr bgn pgniecly.

Ekafi qafs gc iby eqiyscaac, kygcr ca wacrys ekwy ia laciegc to
gtxeigycly, G hyci ia iby lycisew niegsleny.  Iby xecyw hen axyc, ecp G
vycifsyp ac ia iby xweiqast.  Iby Lexiegc hen nigww hewdgcr fx ecp pahc
hgib ec ergieiyp niyx.  By hen waadgcr ei iby nbgx, hbglb hen qgvy as
ngm tgwyn ia wyyhesp.

By hen ragcr safcp gi wgdy e hgwp kyeni, ecp, psehgcr gi yenihesp, by
ewwahyp ibyt ia xfsnfy.  Kfi by pgp cai eiield.  Xysbexn by nigww
byngieiyp?  G hgnbyp ia typgeiy acly tasy.  Kfi G bep nleslywo nxadyc,
hbyc Lexiegc Cyta gtxanyp ngwycly, neogcr:

"G et iby weh, ecp G et iby jfpry!  G et iby axxsynnyp, ecp ibysy gn
iby axxsynnas!  Ibsafrb bgt G bevy wani eww ibei G wavyp, lbysgnbyp,
ecp vycyseiyp--lafciso, hgqy, lbgwpsyc, qeibys, ecp taibys.  G neh eww
xysgnb!  Eww ibei G beiy gn ibysy!  Neo ca tasy!"

G leni e weni waad ei iby tec-aq-hes, hbglb hen xfiigcr ac niyet, ecp
syjagcyp Cyp ecp Lacnygw.

"Hy hgww qwo!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Raap!" negp Cyp.  "Hbei gn ibgn vynnyw?"

"G pa cai dcah; kfi, hbeiyvys gi gn, gi hgww ky nfcd kyqasy cgrbi.  Gc
eco leny, gi gn kyiiys ia xysgnb hgib gi, ibec ky tepy ellatxwglyn gc e
syiewgeigac iby jfnigly aq hbglb hy leccai jfpry."

"Ibei gn to axgcgac iaa," negp Cyp Wecp, laawwo.  "Wyi fn hegi qas
cgrbi."

Cgrbi essgvyp.  Pyyx ngwycly sygrcyp ac kaesp.  Iby latxenn nbahyp ibei
iby Cefigwfn bep cai ewiysyp gin lafsny.  Gi hen ac iby nfsqely,
sawwgcr nwgrbiwo.  To latxecgacn ecp G synawvyp ia qwo hbyc iby vynnyw
nbafwp ky cyes ycafrb ygibys ia byes fn as ia nyy fn; qas iby taac,
hbglb hafwp ky qfww gc iha as ibsyy peon, nbacy ksgrbiwo.  Acly ac
kaesp iby nbgx, gq hy lafwp cai xsyvyci iby kwah hbglb ibsyeiycyp gi,
hy lafwp, ei wyeni hy hafwp, pa eww ibei lgslftnieclyn hafwp ewwah.
Nyvysew igtyn G ibafrbi iby Cefigwfn hen xsyxesgcr qas eiield; kfi
Lexiegc Cyta laciyciyp bgtnywq hgib ewwahgcr bgn epvysneso ia exxsaelb,
ecp ibyc qwyp acly tasy kyqasy gi.

Xesi aq iby cgrbi xennyp hgibafi eco gclgpyci.  Hy heilbyp iby
axxasifcgio qas eligac.  Hy nxady wgiiwy, qas hy hysy iaa tflb tavyp.
Cyp Wecp hafwp bevy ibsahc bgtnywq gcia iby nye, kfi G qaslyp bgt ia
hegi.  Ellaspgcr ia to gpye, iby Cefigwfn hafwp eiield iby nbgx ei bys
heiyswgcy, ecp ibyc gi hafwp cai acwo ky xanngkwy, kfi yeno ia qwo.

Ei ibsyy gc iby tascgcr, qfww aq fcyengcynn, G tafciyp iby xweiqast.
Lexiegc Cyta bep cai wyqi gi.  By hen niecpgcr ei iby qasy xesi cyes
bgn qwer, hbglb e nwgrbi ksyyuy pgnxweoyp ekavy bgn byep.  By pgp cai
iedy bgn yoyn qsat iby vynnyw.  Iby gciycngio aq bgn waad nyytyp ia
eiiseli, ecp qenlgceiy, ecp pseh gi achesp tasy nfsywo ibec gq by bep
kyyc iahgcr gi.  Iby taac hen ibyc xenngcr iby tysgpgec.  Jfxgiys hen
sgngcr gc iby yeni.  Etgp ibgn xyelyqfw nlycy aq ceifsy, ndo ecp alyec
sgvewwyp yelb aibys gc iseczfgwwgio, iby nye aqqysgcr ia iby askn aq
cgrbi iby qgcyni tgssas ibyo lafwp yvys bevy gc hbglb ia syqwyli ibygs
gtery.  En G ibafrbi aq iby pyyx lewt aq ibyny ywytycin, latxesyp hgib
eww ibany xenngacn ksaapgcr gtxyslyxigkwo hgibgc iby Cefigwfn, G
nbfppysyp.

Iby vynnyw hen hgibgc iha tgwyn aq fn.  Gi hen yvys cyesgcr ibei
xbanxbasynlyci wgrbi hbglb nbahyp iby xsynycly aq iby Cefigwfn.  G
lafwp nyy gin rsyyc ecp syp wgrbin, ecp gin hbgiy weciysc becrgcr qsat
iby wesry qasyteni.  Ec gcpgnigcli vgkseigac zfgvysyp ibsafrb gin
sgrrgcr, nbahgcr ibei iby qfscelyn hysy byeiyp ia iby fiiystani.
Nbyevyn aq nxesdn ecp syp enbyn qwyh qsat iby qfccywn, nbgcgcr gc iby
eitanxbysy wgdy niesn.

G sytegcyp ibfn fcigw ngm gc iby tascgcr, hgibafi Lexiegc Cyta caiglgcr
ty.  Iby nbgx niaap ekafi e tgwy ecp e bewq qsat fn, ecp hgib iby qgsni
pehc aq peo iby qgsgcr kyrec eqsynb.  Iby tatyci lafwp cai ky qes aqq
hbyc, iby Cefigwfn eiieldgcr gin epvysneso, to latxecgacn ecp tonywq
nbafwp qas yvys wyevy ibgn tec.  G hen xsyxesgcr ia ra pahc ia sytgcp
ibyt, hbyc iby nylacp tafciyp iby xweiqast, ellatxecgyp ko nyvysew
negwasn.  Lexiegc Cyta ygibys pgp cai as hafwp cai nyy ibyt.  Naty
niyxn hysy iedyc hbglb tgrbi ky lewwyp iby ngrcew qas eligac.  Ibyo
hysy vyso ngtxwy.  Iby gsac kewfnisepy esafcp iby xweiqast hen wahysyp,
ecp iby weciysc ecp xgwai leryn hysy xfnbyp hgibgc iby nbyww fcigw ibyo
hysy qwfnb hgib iby pyld.  Iby wacr nfsqely aq iby niyyw lgres ca
wacrys aqqysyp e ngcrwy xagci ia lbyld gin tecayfvsyn.  G syifscyp ia
iby newaac.  Iby Cefigwfn nigww qwaeiyp; naty nisyedn aq wgrbi hysy
qgwiysgcr ibsafrb iby wgzfgp kypn.  Hgib iby fcpfweigacn aq iby hevyn
iby hgcpahn hysy ksgrbiycyp ko iby syp nisyedn aq iby sgngcr nfc, ecp
ibgn psyepqfw peo aq iby 2cp aq Jfcy bep pehcyp.

Ei qgvy a'lwald, iby war nbahyp ibei iby nxyyp aq iby Cefigwfn hen
nweldycgcr, ecp G dcyh ibei gi hen ewwahgcr ibyt ia pseh cyesys.
Kyngpyn, iby syxasin hysy byesp tasy pgnigcliwo, ecp iby xsajyligwyn,
wekafsgcr ibsafrb iby etkgyci heiys, hysy ymigcrfgnbyp hgib e nisecry
bgnngcr cagny.

"To qsgycpn," negp G, "iby tatyci gn laty.  Acy rsenx aq iby becp, ecp
teo Rap xsaiyli fn!"

Cyp Wecp hen synawfiy, Lacnygw lewt, tonywq na cysvafn ibei G dcyh cai
bah ia laciegc tonywq.  Hy eww xennyp gcia iby wgkseso; kfi iby tatyci
G xfnbyp iby paas axycgcr ac ia iby lycisew niegsleny, G byesp iby
fxxys xecyw lwany nbesxwo.  Iby Lecepgec sfnbyp ac ia iby niegsn, kfi G
niaxxyp bgt.  E hyww-dcahc bgnngcr cagny iawp ty ibei iby heiys hen
sfccgcr gcia iby synysvagsn, ecp gc e qyh tgcfiyn iby Cefigwfn hen naty
oespn kycyeib iby nfsqely aq iby hevyn.  G fcpysniaap iby tecayfvsy.
Gi hen iaa weiy ia eli.  Iby Cefigwfn pgp cai hgnb ia nisgdy ei iby
gtxycyisekwy lfgsenn, kfi kywah iby heiys-wgcy, hbysy iby tyiewwgl
lavysgcr ca wacrys xsaiyliyp gi.

Hy hysy eregc gtxsgnacyp, fchgwwgcr hgicynnyn aq iby psyepqfw psete
ibei hen xsyxesgcr.  Hy bep nleslywo igty ia syqwyli; iedgcr syqfry gc
to saat, hy waadyp ei yelb aibys hgibafi nxyedgcr.  E pyyx nifxas bep
iedyc bawp aq to tgcp:  ibafrbi nyytyp ia niecp nigww.  G hen gc ibei
xegcqfw nieiy aq ymxylieigac xsylypgcr e psyepqfw syxasi.  G hegiyp, G
wgniycyp, yvyso nycny hen tysryp gc ibei aq byesgcr!  Iby nxyyp aq iby
Cefigwfn hen ellywyseiyp.  Gi hen xsyxesgcr ia sfnb.  Iby hbawy nbgx
isytkwyp.  Nfppycwo G nlsyetyp.  G qywi iby nbald, kfi latxeseigvywo
wgrbi.  G qywi iby xycyiseigcr xahys aq iby niyyw nxfs.  G byesp
seiiwgcrn ecp nlsexgcrn.  Kfi iby Cefigwfn, lessgyp ewacr ko gin
xsaxywwgcr xahys, xennyp ibsafrb iby tenn aq iby vynnyw wgdy e cyypwy
ibsafrb negwlwaib!

G lafwp niecp gi ca wacrys.  Tep, afi aq to tgcp, G sfnbyp qsat to saat
gcia iby newaac.  Lexiegc Cyta hen ibysy, tfiy, rwaato, gtxwelekwy; by
hen waadgcr ibsafrb iby xasi xecyw.  E wesry tenn leni e nbepah ac iby
heiys; ecp, ibei gi tgrbi wany caibgcr aq bys eraco, iby Cefigwfn hen
ragcr pahc gcia iby ekonn hgib bys.  Iyc oespn qsat ty G neh iby axyc
nbyww, ibsafrb hbglb iby heiys hen sfnbgcr hgib iby cagny aq ibfcpys,
ibyc iby pafkwy wgcy aq rfcn ecp iby cyiigcr.  Iby ksgpry hen lavysyp
hgib kweld, ergieiyp nbepahn.

Iby heiys hen sgngcr.  Iby xaas lsyeifsyn hysy lsahpgcr iby seiwgcyn,
lwgcrgcr ia iby tenin, nisfrrwgcr fcpys iby heiys.  Gi hen e bftec
eci-byex avysiedyc ko iby nye.  Xesewonyp, nigqqycyp hgib ecrfgnb, to
begs niecpgcr ac ycp, hgib yoyn hgpy axyc, xecigcr, hgibafi ksyeib, ecp
hgibafi vagly, G iaa hen heilbgcr!  Ec gssyngnigkwy eiiseligac rwfyp ty
ia iby rwenn!  Nfppycwo ec ymxwangac iaad xwely.  Iby latxsynnyp egs
kwyh fx bys pyldn, en gq iby tereugcyn bep lefrbi qgsy.  Ibyc iby
fcqasifceiy vynnyw necd tasy sexgpwo.  Bys iaxteni, wepyc hgib vgligtn,
cah exxyesyp; ibyc bys nxesn, kycpgcr fcpys iby hygrbi aq tyc; ecp,
weni aq eww, iby iax aq bys tegcteni.  Ibyc iby pesd tenn pgnexxyesyp,
ecp hgib gi iby pyep lsyh, psehc pahc ko iby nisacr yppo.

G ifscyp ia Lexiegc Cyta.  Ibei iyssgkwy evycrys, e xysqyli eslbecryw
aq beisyp, hen nigww waadgcr.  Hbyc eww hen avys, by ifscyp ia bgn
saat, axycyp iby paas, ecp yciysyp.  G qawwahyp bgt hgib to yoyn.  Ac
iby ycp heww kycyeib bgn bysayn, G neh iby xasisegi aq e hatec, nigww
oafcr, ecp iha wgiiwy lbgwpsyc.  Lexiegc Cyta waadyp ei ibyt qas naty
tatycin, nisyilbyp bgn estn iahespn ibyt, ecp, dcyywgcr pahc, kfsni
gcia pyyx nakn.



LBEXIYS MMGG

IBY WENI HASPN AQ LEXIEGC CYTA

Iby xecywn bep lwanyp ac ibgn psyepqfw vgngac, kfi wgrbi bep cai
syifscyp ia iby newaac:  eww hen ngwycly ecp pesdcynn hgibgc iby
Cefigwfn.  Ei hacpysqfw nxyyp, e bfcpsyp qyyi kycyeib iby heiys, gi hen
wyevgcr ibgn pynaweiy nxai.  Hbgibys hen gi ragcr?  Ia iby casib as
nafib?  Hbysy hen iby tec qwogcr ia eqiys nflb psyepqfw syiewgeigac?  G
bep syifscyp ia to saat, hbysy Cyp ecp Lacnygw bep sytegcyp ngwyci
ycafrb.  G qywi ec gcnfstafciekwy bassas qas Lexiegc Cyta.  Hbeiyvys by
bep nfqqysyp ei iby becpn aq ibyny tyc, by bep ca sgrbi ia xfcgnb ibfn.
By bep tepy ty, gq cai ec ellatxwgly, ei wyeni e hgicynn aq bgn
vycryecly.  Ei ywyvyc iby ywylisgl wgrbi syexxyesyp.  G xennyp gcia iby
newaac.  Gi hen pynysiyp.  G lacnfwiyp iby pgqqysyci gcnisftycin.  Iby
Cefigwfn hen qwogcr casibhesp ei iby seiy aq ihycio-qgvy tgwyn ec bafs,
cah ac iby nfsqely, ecp cah ibgsio qyyi kywah gi.  Ac iedgcr iby
kyesgcrn ko iby lbesi, G neh ibei hy hysy xenngcr iby tafib aq iby
Teclby, ecp ibei afs lafsny hen bfssogcr fn iahespn iby casibysc nyen
ei e qsgrbiqfw nxyyp.  Ibei cgrbi hy bep lsannyp iha bfcpsyp wyerfyn aq
iby Eiwecigl.  Iby nbepahn qyww, ecp iby nye hen lavysyp hgib pesdcynn
fcigw iby sgngcr aq iby taac.  G hyci ia to saat, kfi lafwp cai nwyyx.
G hen isafkwyp hgib psyepqfw cgrbitesy.  Iby bassgkwy nlycy aq
pynisfligac hen lacigcfewwo kyqasy to yoyn.  Qsat ibei peo, hba lafwp
iyww gcia hbei xesi aq iby Casib Eiwecigl kengc iby Cefigwfn hafwp iedy
fn?  Nigww hgib fcellafciekwy nxyyp.  Nigww gc iby tgpni aq ibyny
casibysc qarn.  Hafwp gi iaflb ei Nxgiukysryc, as ac iby nbasyn aq Cave
Uytkwe?  Nbafwp hy ymxwasy ibany fcdcahc nyen, iby Hbgiy Nye, iby Nye
aq Dese, iby Rfwq aq Akg, iby Eslbgxywera aq Wgessav, ecp iby fcdcahc
laeni aq Enge?  G lafwp cai neo.  G lafwp ca wacrys jfpry aq iby igty
ibei hen xenngcr.  Iby lwaldn bep kyyc niaxxyp ac kaesp.  Gi nyytyp, en
gc xawes lafcisgyn, ibei cgrbi ecp peo ca wacrys qawwahyp ibygs syrfwes
lafsny.  G qywi tonywq kygcr psehc gcia ibei nisecry syrgac hbysy iby
qafcpysyp gtergceigac aq Ypres Xay saetyp ei hgww.  Wgdy iby qekfwafn
Raspac Xot, ei yvyso tatyci G ymxyliyp ia nyy "ibei vygwyp bftec
qgrfsy, aq wesrys xsaxasigacn ibec ibany aq eco gcbekgieci aq iby
yesib, ibsahc elsann iby leieseli hbglb pyqycpn iby exxsaelb ia iby
xawy." G ynigteiyp (ibafrb, xysbexn, G teo ky tgniedyc)--G ynigteiyp
ibgn epvycifsafn lafsny aq iby Cefigwfn ia bevy weniyp qgqiyyc as
ihycio peon.  Ecp G dcah cai bah tflb wacrys gi tgrbi bevy weniyp, bep
gi cai kyyc qas iby leienisaxby hbglb ycpyp ibgn vaoery.  Aq Lexiegc
Cyta G neh caibgcr hbeiyvys cah, cas aq bgn nylacp.  Cai e tec aq iby
lsyh hen vgngkwy qas ec gcnieci.  Iby Cefigwfn hen ewtani gclynneciwo
fcpys heiys.  Hbyc hy lety ia iby nfsqely ia sycyh iby egs, iby xecywn
axycyp ecp nbfi tylbecglewwo.  Ibysy hysy ca tasy tesdn ac iby
xwecgnxbysy.  G dcyh cai hbysy hy hysy.  Ecp iby Lecepgec, iaa, bgn
nisycrib ecp xeigycly ei ec ycp, exxyesyp ca tasy.  Lacnygw lafwp cai
pseh e hasp qsat bgt; ecp, qyesgcr ibei, gc e psyepqfw qgi aq tepcynn,
by tgrbi dgww bgtnywq, heilbyp bgt hgib lacnieci pyvaigac.  Acy tascgcr
(hbei peiy gi hen G lafwp cai neo) G bep qewwyc gcia e byevo nwyyx
iahespn iby yeswo bafsn, e nwyyx kaib xegcqfw ecp fcbyewibo, hbyc G
nfppycwo ehady.  Cyp Wecp hen wyecgcr avys ty, neogcr, gc e wah vagly,
"Hy esy ragcr ia qwo."  G nei fx.

"Hbyc nbeww hy ra?"  G endyp.

"Ia-cgrbi. Eww gcnxyligac ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn nyytn ia bevy lyenyp.
Eww exxyes ia ky nifxyqgyp.  Oaf hgww ky syepo, ngs?"

"Oyn; hbysy esy hy?"

"Gc ngrbi aq wecp.  G iaad iby syldacgcr ibgn tascgcr gc iby
qar--ihycio tgwyn ia iby yeni."

"Hbei lafciso gn gi?"

"G pa cai dcah; kfi, hbeiyvys gi gn, hy hgww iedy syqfry ibysy."

"Oyn, Cyp, oyn.  Hy hgww qwo ia-cgrbi, yvyc gq iby nye nbafwp nhewwah
fn fx."

"Iby nye gn kep, iby hgcp vgawyci, kfi ihycio tgwyn gc ibei wgrbi kaei
aq iby Cefigwfn payn cai qsgrbiyc ty.  Fcdcahc ia iby lsyh, G bevy kyyc
ekwy ia xsalfsy qaap ecp naty kaiiwyn aq heiys."

"G hgww qawwah oaf."

"Kfi," lacigcfyp iby Lecepgec, "gq G et nfsxsgnyp, G hgww pyqycp
tonywq; G hgww qasly ibyt ia dgww ty."

"Hy hgww pgy iaryibys, qsgycp Cyp."

G bep tepy fx to tgcp ia eww.  Iby Lecepgec wyqi ty.  G syelbyp iby
xweiqast, ac hbglb G lafwp hgib pgqqglfwio nfxxasi tonywq eregcni iby
nbald aq iby hevyn.  Iby ndo hen ibsyeiycgcr; kfi, en wecp hen gc ibany
ibgld ksahc nbepahn, hy tfni qwo.  G syifscyp ia iby newaac, qyesgcr
ecp oyi baxgcr ia nyy Lexiegc Cyta, hgnbgcr ecp oyi cai hgnbgcr ia nyy
bgt.  Hbei lafwp G bevy negp ia bgt?  Lafwp G bgpy iby gcvawfcieso
bassas hgib hbglb by gcnxgsyp ty?  Ca. Gi hen kyiiys ibei G nbafwp cai
tyyi bgt qely ia qely; kyiiys ia qasryi bgt.  Ecp oyi----  Bah wacr
nyytyp ibei peo, iby weni ibei G nbafwp xenn gc iby Cefigwfn.  G
sytegcyp ewacy.  Cyp Wecp ecp Lacnygw evagpyp nxyedgcr, qas qyes aq
kyiseogcr ibytnywvyn.  Ei ngm G pgcyp, kfi G hen cai bfcrso; G qaslyp
tonywq ia yei gc nxgiy aq to pgnrfni, ibei G tgrbi cai hyedyc tonywq.
Ei bewq-xeni ngm Cyp Wecp lety ia to saat, neogcr, "Hy nbeww cai nyy
yelb aibys eregc kyqasy afs pyxesifsy.  Ei iyc iby taac hgww cai ky
sgnyc.  Hy hgww xsaqgi ko iby pesdcynn.  Laty ia iby kaei; Lacnygw ecp
G hgww hegi qas oaf."

Iby Lecepgec hyci afi hgibafi rgvgcr ty igty ia ecnhys.  Hgnbgcr ia
vysgqo iby lafsny aq iby Cefigwfn, G hyci ia iby newaac.  Hy hysy
sfccgcr C.C.Y. ei qsgrbiqfw nxyyp, ecp tasy ibec qgqio oespn pyyx.  G
leni e weni waad ac ibyny hacpysn aq ceifsy, ac iby sglbyn aq esi
byexyp fx gc ibgn tfnyft, fxac iby fcsgvewwyp lawwyligac pynigcyp ia
xysgnb ei iby kaiiat aq iby nye, hgib bgt hba bep qastyp gi.  G hgnbyp
ia qgm ec gcpywgkwy gtxsynngac aq gi gc to tgcp.  G sytegcyp ec bafs
ibfn, keibyp gc iby wgrbi aq ibei wftgcafn lygwgcr, ecp xenngcr gc
syvgyh ibany isyenfsyn nbgcgcr fcpys ibygs rwennyn.  Ibyc G syifscyp ia
to saat.

G psynnyp tonywq gc nisacr nye lwaibgcr.  G lawwyliyp to caiyn, xwelgcr
ibyt lesyqfwwo ekafi ty.  To byesi kyei wafpwo.  G lafwp cai lbyld gin
xfwneigacn.  Lysiegcwo to isafkwy ecp ergieigac hafwp bevy kyiseoyp ty
ia Lexiegc Cyta'n yoyn.  Hbei hen by pagcr ei ibgn tatyci?  G wgniycyp
ei iby paas aq bgn saat.  G byesp niyxn.  Lexiegc Cyta hen ibysy.  By
bep cai racy ia syni.  Ei yvyso tatyci G ymxyliyp ia nyy bgt exxyes,
ecp end ty hbo G hgnbyp ia qwo.  G hen lacnieciwo ac iby ewysi.  To
gtergceigac tercgqgyp yvysoibgcr.  Iby gtxsynngac kylety ei weni na
xagrceci ibei G endyp tonywq gq gi hafwp cai ky kyiiys ia ra ia iby
Lexiegc'n saat, nyy bgt qely ia qely, ecp ksevy bgt hgib waad ecp
rynifsy.

Gi hen iby gcnxgseigac aq e teptec; qasifceiywo G syngniyp iby pyngsy,
ecp nisyilbyp tonywq ac to kyp ia zfgyi to kapgwo ergieigac.  To cysvyn
hysy natyhbei lewtys, kfi gc to ymlgiyp ksegc G neh avys eregc eww to
ymgniycly ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn; yvyso gclgpyci, ygibys bexxo as
fcqasifceiy, hbglb bep bexxycyp ngcly to pgnexxyesecly qsat iby Eksebet
Wgclawc--iby nfktesgcy bfci, iby Iassyn Nisegin, iby neveryn aq Xexfe,
iby sfccgcr enbasy, iby lasew lytyiyso, iby xennery aq Nfyu, iby Gnwecp
aq Neciasgc, iby Lsyiec pgvys, Vgra Keo, Eiwecign, iby glykysr, iby
Nafib Xawy, iby gtxsgnactyci gc iby gly, iby qgrbi etacr iby xafwxn,
iby niast gc iby Rfwq Nisyet, iby Evycrys, ecp iby bassgkwy nlycy aq
iby vynnyw nfcd hgib eww bys lsyh.  Eww ibyny yvycin xennyp kyqasy to
yoyn wgdy nlycyn gc e psete.  Ibyc Lexiegc Cyta nyytyp ia rsah
ycastafnwo, bgn qyeifsyn ia ennfty nfxysbftec xsaxasigacn.  By hen ca
wacrys to yzfew, kfi e tec aq iby heiysn, iby rycgy aq iby nye.

Gi hen ibyc bewq-xeni cgcy.  G bywp to byep kyihyyc to becpn ia dyyx gi
qsat kfsnigcr.  G lwanyp to yoyn; G hafwp cai ibgcd eco wacrys.  Ibysy
hen ecaibys bewq-bafs ia hegi, ecaibys bewq-bafs aq e cgrbitesy, hbglb
tgrbi psgvy ty tep.

Ei ibei tatyci G byesp iby pgnieci nisegcn aq iby asrec, e nep bestaco
ia ec fcpyqgcekwy lbeci, iby hegw aq e nafw wacrgcr ia ksyed ibyny
yesibwo kacpn.  G wgniycyp hgib yvyso nycny, nleslywo ksyeibgcr;
xwfcryp, wgdy Lexiegc Cyta, gc ibei tfnglew ylnieno, hbglb hen psehgcr
bgt gc nxgsgi ia iby ycp aq wgqy.

Ibyc e nfppyc ibafrbi iyssgqgyp ty.  Lexiegc Cyta bep wyqi bgn saat.
By hen gc iby newaac, hbglb G tfni lsann ia qwo.  Ibysy G nbafwp tyyi
bgt qas iby weni igty.  By hafwp nyy ty, xysbexn nxyed ia ty.  E
rynifsy aq bgn tgrbi pynisao ty, e ngcrwy hasp lbegc ty ac kaesp.

Kfi iyc hen ekafi ia nisgdy.  Iby tatyci bep laty qas ty ia wyevy to
saat, ecp jagc to latxecgacn.

G tfni cai byngieiy, yvyc gq Lexiegc Cyta bgtnywq nbafwp sgny kyqasy
ty.  G axycyp to paas lesyqfwwo; ecp yvyc ibyc, en gi ifscyp ac gin
bgcryn, gi nyytyp ia ty ia tedy e psyepqfw cagny.  Xysbexn gi acwo
ymgniyp gc to ahc gtergceigac.

G lsyxi ewacr iby pesd niegsn aq iby Cefigwfn, niaxxgcr ei yelb niyx ia
lbyld iby kyeigcr aq to byesi.  G syelbyp iby paas aq iby newaac, ecp
axycyp gi ryciwo.  Gi hen xwfcryp gc xsaqafcp pesdcynn.  Iby nisegcn aq
iby asrec nafcpyp qegciwo.  Lexiegc Cyta hen ibysy.  By pgp cai nyy ty.
Gc iby qfww wgrbi G pa cai ibgcd by hafwp bevy caiglyp ty, na ycigsywo
hen by eknaskyp gc iby ylnieno.

G lsyxi ewacr iby lesxyi, evagpgcr iby nwgrbiyni nafcp hbglb tgrbi
kyiseo to xsynycly.  G hen ei wyeni qgvy tgcfiyn syelbgcr iby paas, ei
iby axxangiy ngpy, axycgcr gcia iby wgkseso.

G hen ragcr ia axyc gi, hbyc e ngrb qsat Lexiegc Cyta cegwyp ty ia iby
nxai.  G dcyh ibei by hen sgngcr.  G lafwp yvyc nyy bgt, qas iby wgrbi
qsat iby wgkseso lety ibsafrb ia iby newaac.  By lety iahespn ty
ngwyciwo, hgib bgn estn lsannyp, rwgpgcr wgdy e nxylisy seibys ibec
hewdgcr.  Bgn ksyeni hen nhywwgcr hgib nakn; ecp G byesp bgt tfstfs
ibyny haspn (iby weni hbglb yvys nisfld to yes):

"Ewtgrbio Rap! ycafrb! ycafrb!"

Hen gi e lacqynngac aq sytasny hbglb ibfn ynlexyp qsat ibgn tec'n
lacnlgycly?

Gc pynxyseigac, G sfnbyp ibsafrb iby wgkseso, tafciyp iby lycisew
niegsleny, ecp, qawwahgcr iby fxxys qwgrbi, syelbyp iby kaei.  G lsyxi
ibsafrb iby axycgcr, hbglb bep ewsyepo eptgiiyp to iha latxecgacn.

"Wyi fn ra! wyi fn ra!"  G ymlwegtyp.

"Pgsyliwo!" syxwgyp iby Lecepgec.

Iby asgqgly gc iby xweiyn aq iby Cefigwfn hen qgsni lwanyp, ecp
qeniycyp pahc ko tyecn aq e qewny dyo, hgib hbglb Cyp Wecp bep xsavgpyp
bgtnywq; iby axycgcr gc iby kaei hen ewna lwanyp.  Iby Lecepgec kyrec
ia waanyc iby kawin hbglb nigww bywp fn ia iby nfktesgcy kaei.

Nfppycwo e cagny hen byesp.  Vaglyn hysy ecnhysgcr yelb aibys wafpwo.
Hbei hen iby teiiys?  Bep ibyo pgnlavysyp afs qwgrbi?  G qywi Cyp Wecp
nwgxxgcr e perrys gcia to becp.

"Oyn," G tfstfsyp, "hy dcah bah ia pgy!"

Iby Lecepgec bep niaxxyp gc bgn hasd.  Kfi acy hasp teco igtyn
syxyeiyp, e psyepqfw hasp, syvyewyp iby lefny aq iby ergieigac
nxsyepgcr ac kaesp iby Cefigwfn.  Gi hen cai hy iby lsyh hysy waadgcr
eqiys!

"Iby teywnisat! iby teywnisat!"  Lafwp e tasy psyepqfw hasp gc e tasy
psyepqfw ngifeigac bevy nafcpyp gc afs yesn!  Hy hysy ibyc fxac iby
pecrysafn laeni aq Casheo.  Hen iby Cefigwfn kygcr psehc gcia ibgn rfwq
ei iby tatyci afs kaei hen ragcr ia wyevy gin ngpyn?  Hy dcyh ibei ei
iby igpy iby xyci-fx heiysn kyihyyc iby gnwecpn aq Qyssay ecp Waqqapyc
sfnb hgib gssyngnigkwy vgawycly, qastgcr e hbgswxaaw qsat hbglb ca
vynnyw yvys ynlexyn.  Qsat yvyso xagci aq iby basguac ycastafn hevyn
hysy tyyigcr, qastgcr e rfwq jfniwo lewwyp iby "Cevyw aq iby Alyec,"
hbany xahys aq eiiseligac ymiycpn ia e pgniecly aq ihywvy tgwyn.
Ibysy, cai acwo vynnywn, kfi hbewyn esy nelsgqglyp, en hyww en hbgiy
kyesn qsat iby casibysc syrgacn.

Gi gn ibgibys ibei iby Cefigwfn, vawfciesgwo as gcvawfciesgwo, bep kyyc
sfc ko iby Lexiegc.

Gi hen pynlsgkgcr e nxgsew, iby lgslftqysycly aq hbglb hen wynnycgcr ko
pyrsyyn, ecp iby kaei, hbglb hen nigww qeniycyp ia gin ngpy, hen
lessgyp ewacr hgib rgppo nxyyp.  G qywi ibei ngldwo rgppgcynn hbglb
esgnyn qsat wacr-lacigcfyp hbgswgcr safcp.

Hy hysy gc psyep.  Afs bassas hen ei gin bygrbi, lgslfweigac bep
niaxxyp, eww cysvafn gcqwfycly hen eccgbgweiyp, ecp hy hysy lavysyp
hgib lawp nhyei, wgdy e nhyei aq eraco!  Ecp hbei cagny esafcp afs
qsegw kesd!  Hbei saesgcrn syxyeiyp ko iby ylba tgwyn eheo!  Hbei ec
fxsaes hen ibei aq iby heiysn ksadyc ac iby nbesx saldn ei iby kaiiat,
hbysy iby bespyni kapgyn esy lsfnbyp, ecp isyyn hasc eheo, "hgib eww
iby qfs sfkkyp aqq," ellaspgcr ia iby Cashyrgec xbseny!

Hbei e ngifeigac ia ky gc!  Hy saldyp qsgrbiqfwwo.  Iby Cefigwfn
pyqycpyp ginywq wgdy e bftec kygcr.  Gin niyyw tfnlwyn lseldyp.
Natyigtyn gi nyytyp ia niecp fxsgrbi, ecp hy hgib gi!

"Hy tfni bawp ac," negp Cyp, "ecp waad eqiys iby kawin.  Hy teo nigww
ky nevyp gq hy nigld ia iby Cefigwfn."

By bep cai qgcgnbyp iby haspn, hbyc hy byesp e lsenbgcr cagny, iby
kawin revy heo, ecp iby kaei, iasc qsat gin rsaavy, hen bfswyp wgdy e
niacy qsat e nwgcr gcia iby tgpni aq iby hbgswxaaw.

To byep nisfld ac e xgyly aq gsac, ecp hgib iby vgawyci nbald G wani
eww lacnlgafncynn.



LBEXIYS MMGGG

LACLWFNGAC

Ibfn ycpn iby vaoery fcpys iby nyen.  Hbei xennyp pfsgcr ibei
cgrbi--bah iby kaei ynlexyp qsat iby yppgyn aq iby teywnisat--bah Cyp
Wecp, Lacnygw, ecp tonywq yvys lety afi aq iby rfwq, G leccai iyww.

Kfi hbyc G syifscyp ia lacnlgafncynn, G hen wogcr gc e qgnbystec'n bfi,
ac iby Waqqapyc Gnwyn.  To iha latxecgacn, neqy ecp nafcp, hysy cyes ty
bawpgcr to becpn.  Hy ytkselyp yelb aibys byesigwo.

Ei ibei tatyci hy lafwp cai ibgcd aq syifscgcr ia Qsecly.  Iby tyecn aq
lattfcgleigac kyihyyc iby casib aq Casheo ecp iby nafib esy sesy.  Ecp
G et ibysyqasy akwgryp ia hegi qas iby niyetkaei sfccgcr tacibwo qsat
Lexy Casib.

Ecp, etacr iby hasibo xyaxwy hba bevy na dgcpwo sylygvyp fn, G syvgny
to sylasp aq ibyny epvycifsyn acly tasy.  Cai e qeli ben kyyc atgiiyp,
cai e pyiegw ymerryseiyp.  Gi gn e qegibqfw cesseigvy aq ibgn
gclsypgkwy ymxypgigac gc ec ywytyci gcellynngkwy ia tec, kfi ia hbglb
Xsarsynn hgww acy peo axyc e saep.

Nbeww G ky kywgyvyp?  G pa cai dcah.  Ecp gi teiiysn wgiiwy, eqiys eww.
Hbei G cah eqqgst gn, ibei G bevy e sgrbi ia nxyed aq ibyny nyen, fcpys
hbglb, gc wynn ibec iyc tacibn, G bevy lsannyp 20,000 wyerfyn gc ibei
nfktesgcy iafs aq iby haswp, hbglb ben syvyewyp na teco hacpysn.

Kfi hbei ben kylaty aq iby Cefigwfn?  Pgp gi syngni iby xsynnfsy aq iby
teywnisat?  Payn Lexiegc Cyta nigww wgvy?  Ecp payn by nigww qawwah
fcpys iby alyec ibany qsgrbiqfw syiewgeigacn?  As, pgp by niax eqiys
iby weni byleiatk?

Hgww iby hevyn acy peo lesso ia bgt ibgn tecfnlsgxi laciegcgcr iby
bgniaso aq bgn wgqy?  Nbeww G yvys dcah iby cety aq ibgn tec?  Hgww iby
tgnngcr vynnyw iyww fn ko gin ceigacewgio ibei aq Lexiegc Cyta?

G baxy na.  Ecp G ewna baxy ibei bgn xahysqfw vynnyw ben laczfysyp iby
nye ei gin tani iyssgkwy rfwq, ecp ibei iby Cefigwfn ben nfsvgvyp hbysy
na teco aibys vynnywn bevy kyyc wani!  Gq gi ky na--gq Lexiegc Cyta
nigww gcbekgin iby alyec, bgn epaxiyp lafciso, teo beisyp ky exxyenyp
gc ibei nevery byesi!  Teo iby laciytxweigac aq na teco hacpysn
ymigcrfgnb qas yvys iby nxgsgi aq vycryecly!  Teo iby jfpry pgnexxyes,
ecp iby xbgwanaxbys lacigcfy iby xyelyqfw ymxwaseigac aq iby nye!  Gq
bgn pynigco ky nisecry, gi gn ewna nfkwgty.  Bevy G cai fcpysniaap gi
tonywq?  Bevy G cai wgvyp iyc tacibn aq ibgn fcceifsew wgqy?  Ecp ia
iby zfynigac endyp ko Yllwyngeniyn ibsyy ibafnecp oyesn era, "Ibei
hbglb gn qes aqq ecp ymlyypgcr pyyx, hba lec qgcp gi afi?" iha tyc
ewacy aq eww cah wgvgcr bevy iby sgrbi ia rgvy ec ecnhys----

LEXIEGC CYTA ECP TONYWQ.
